                        [Illustration:

                             GEORGE ALLEN
                               PUBLISHER

                        156 CHARING CROSS ROAD
                                LONDON

                             RUSKIN HOUSE
                                   ]

                            [Illustration:

               _Reading Jane’s Letters._      _Chap 34._
                                   ]




                                PRIDE.
                                  and
                               PREJUDICE

                                  by
                             Jane Austen,

                           with a Preface by
                           George Saintsbury
                                  and
                           Illustrations by
                             Hugh Thomson

                         [Illustration: 1894]

                       Ruskin       156. Charing
                       House.        Cross Road.

                                London
                             George Allen.




             CHISWICK PRESS:--CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.




                            [Illustration:

                          _To J. Comyns Carr
                      in acknowledgment of all I
                       owe to his friendship and
                    advice, these illustrations are
                         gratefully inscribed_

                            _Hugh Thomson_
                                   ]




PREFACE.

[Illustration]


_Walt Whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between “loving
by allowance” and “loving with personal love.” This distinction applies
to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very
numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it
brings a curious consequence with it. There is much more difference as
to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved “by
allowance” by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and
proper thing to love them. And in the sect--fairly large and yet
unusually choice--of Austenians or Janites, there would probably be
found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the
novels. To some the delightful freshness and humour of_ Northanger
Abbey, _its completeness, finish, and_ entrain, _obscure the undoubted
critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that
of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with
difficulty._ Persuasion, _relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling
in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite
delicacy and keeping. The catastrophe of_ Mansfield Park _is admittedly
theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost
wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that
Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked him, and that Fanny might
very likely have taken Crawford if he had been a little more assiduous;
yet the matchless rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and
others have secured, I believe, a considerable party for it._ Sense and
Sensibility _has perhaps the fewest out-and-out admirers; but it does
not want them._

_I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes
would, all things considered, be divided between_ Emma _and the present
book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for Miss
Austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge
of vulgarity) would go for_ Emma. _It is the larger, the more varied, the
more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather
more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most
peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as Miss Bates, as the
Eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody. On the other hand,
I, for my part, declare for_ Pride and Prejudice _unhesitatingly. It
seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most
eminently quintessential of its author’s works; and for this contention
in such narrow space as is permitted to me, I propose here to show
cause._

_In the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the
reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796,
when Miss Austen was barely twenty-one; though it was revised and
finished at Chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till
1813, only four years before her death. I do not know whether, in this
combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the
critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct
superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it
possesses over all the others. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost
regular enough for Fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident
could be retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia
and Wickham is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs. Rushworth, a_ coup de
théâtre; _it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the
story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety.
All the minor passages--the loves of Jane and Bingley, the advent of Mr.
Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derbyshire tour--fit in after the
same unostentatious, but masterly fashion. There is no attempt at the
hide-and-seek, in-and-out business, which in the transactions between
Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the
intrigue of_ Emma, _but contributes it in a fashion which I do not think
the best feature of that otherwise admirable book. Although Miss Austen
always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her
opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to
be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly
natural occasions provided by the false account of Darcy’s conduct given
by Wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from
the gradual transformation of Elizabeth’s own feelings from positive
aversion to actual love. I do not know whether the all-grasping hand of
the playwright has ever been laid upon_ Pride and Prejudice; _and I dare
say that, if it were, the situations would prove not startling or
garish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too subtle and
delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt were made, it would
certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction,
which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can
avail himself, appear at once on the stage._

_I think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to
more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest
merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist. It sets off his other gifts
and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it
will sometimes mar those graces--appreciably, though not quite
consciously--to eyes by no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built
novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which
displayed consummate command of dialogue--perhaps the rarest of all
faculties--would be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot
acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths. And despite the
ability which Miss Austen has shown in working out the story, I for one
should put_ Pride and Prejudice _far lower if it did not contain what
seem to me the very masterpieces of Miss Austen’s humour and of her
faculty of character-creation--masterpieces who may indeed admit John
Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris, and one or two others to their company,
but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still
superior to them._

_The characteristics of Miss Austen’s humour are so subtle and delicate
that they are, perhaps, at all times easier to apprehend than to
express, and at any particular time likely to be differently
apprehended by different persons. To me this humour seems to possess a
greater affinity, on the whole, to that of Addison than to any other of
the numerous species of this great British genus. The differences of
scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of course,
obvious enough; the difference of sex does not, perhaps, count for much,
for there was a distinctly feminine element in “Mr. Spectator,” and in
Jane Austen’s genius there was, though nothing mannish, much that was
masculine. But the likeness of quality consists in a great number of
common subdivisions of quality--demureness, extreme minuteness of touch,
avoidance of loud tones and glaring effects. Also there is in both a
certain not inhuman or unamiable cruelty. It is the custom with those
who judge grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the
savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the boisterousness
of Fielding and Smollett, even with the ferocious practical jokes that
her immediate predecessor, Miss Burney, allowed without very much
protest. Yet, both in Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there is, though a
restrained and well-mannered, an insatiable and ruthless delight in
roasting and cutting up a fool. A man in the early eighteenth century,
of course, could push this taste further than a lady in the early
nineteenth; and no doubt Miss Austen’s principles, as well as her heart,
would have shrunk from such things as the letter from the unfortunate
husband in the_ Spectator, _who describes, with all the gusto and all the
innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend induce him to play
at blind-man’s-buff. But another_ Spectator _letter--that of the damsel
of fourteen who wishes to marry Mr. Shapely, and assures her selected
Mentor that “he admires your_ Spectators _mightily”--might have been
written by a rather more ladylike and intelligent Lydia Bennet in the
days of Lydia’s great-grandmother; while, on the other hand, some (I
think unreasonably) have found “cynicism” in touches of Miss Austen’s
own, such as her satire of Mrs. Musgrove’s self-deceiving regrets over
her son. But this word “cynical” is one of the most misused in the
English language, especially when, by a glaring and gratuitous
falsification of its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and
snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire. If cynicism means
the perception of “the other side,” the sense of “the accepted hells
beneath,” the consciousness that motives are nearly always mixed, and
that to seem is not identical with to be--if this be cynicism, then
every man and woman who is not a fool, who does not care to live in a
fool’s paradise, who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is
a cynic. And in that sense Miss Austen certainly was one. She may even
have been one in the further sense that, like her own Mr. Bennet, she
took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at
work her fools and her mean persons. I think she did take this delight,
and I do not think at all the worse of her for it as a woman, while she
was immensely the better for it as an artist._

_In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith has truly observed
that “metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it,
combined with the narrowness of her field;” and he has justly added that
we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature
painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the
term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of Memling
at one end of the history of painting and Meissonier at the other, than
of Cosway or any of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should
myself use the word “narrow” in connection with her. If her world is a
microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the
littleness. She does not touch what she did not feel herself called to
paint; I am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not
feel herself called to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very
short periods of writing--one of about three years, and another of not
much more than five--she executed six capital works, and has not left a
single failure. It is possible that the romantic paste in her
composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly
anybody born in her decade--that of the eighteenth-century
seventies--independently exhibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott
required hill and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and
German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss Austen was an
English girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when
ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might
pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the
gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were
subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which
Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular
taste or judgment. Miss Austen, too, drew back when the white frost
touched her shoes; but I think she would have made a pretty good journey
even in a black one._

_For if her knowledge was not very extended, she knew two things which
only genius knows. The one was humanity, and the other was art. On the
first head she could not make a mistake; her men, though limited, are
true, and her women are, in the old sense, “absolute.” As to art, if she
has never tried idealism, her realism is real to a degree which makes
the false realism of our own day look merely dead-alive. Take almost any
Frenchman, except the late M. de Maupassant, and watch him laboriously
piling up strokes in the hope of giving a complete impression. You get
none; you are lucky if, discarding two-thirds of what he gives, you can
shape a real impression out of the rest. But with Miss Austen the
myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build up the picture like magic.
Nothing is false; nothing is superfluous. When (to take the present book
only) Mr. Collins changed his mind from Jane to Elizabeth “while Mrs.
Bennet was stirring the fire” (and we know_ how _Mrs. Bennet would have
stirred the fire), when Mr. Darcy “brought his coffee-cup back_
himself,” _the touch in each case is like that of Swift--“taller by the
breadth of my nail”--which impressed the half-reluctant Thackeray with
just and outspoken admiration. Indeed, fantastic as it may seem, I
should put Miss Austen as near to Swift in some ways, as I have put her
to Addison in others._

_This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears
nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable Mr.
Collins. Mr. Collins is really_ great; _far greater than anything Addison
ever did, almost great enough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has
been said that no one ever was like him. But in the first place,_ he
_was like him; he is there--alive, imperishable, more real than hundreds
of prime ministers and archbishops, of “metals, semi-metals, and
distinguished philosophers.” In the second place, it is rash, I think,
to conclude that an actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at
the end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that we
possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first
draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in John Dashwood. The
formality, the under-breeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait
is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr.
Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all the
“miniature,” there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain
side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenth-century
humanity, its Philistinism, its well-meaning but hide-bound morality,
its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism,
its selfishness, receives exhibition. I will not admit that one speech
or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled
with reality, and I should not wonder if many of these words and actions
are historically true._

_But the greatness of Mr. Collins could not have been so satisfactorily
exhibited if his creatress had not adjusted so artfully to him the
figures of Mr. Bennet and of Lady Catherine de Bourgh. The latter, like
Mr. Collins himself, has been charged with exaggeration. There is,
perhaps, a very faint shade of colour for the charge; but it seems to me
very faint indeed. Even now I do not think that it would be impossible
to find persons, especially female persons, not necessarily of noble
birth, as overbearing, as self-centred, as neglectful of good manners,
as Lady Catherine. A hundred years ago, an earl’s daughter, the Lady
Powerful (if not exactly Bountiful) of an out-of-the-way country parish,
rich, long out of marital authority, and so forth, had opportunities of
developing these agreeable characteristics which seldom present
themselves now. As for Mr. Bennet, Miss Austen, and Mr. Darcy, and even
Miss Elizabeth herself, were, I am inclined to think, rather hard on him
for the “impropriety” of his conduct. His wife was evidently, and must
always have been, a quite irreclaimable fool; and unless he had shot her
or himself there was no way out of it for a man of sense and spirit but
the ironic. From no other point of view is he open to any reproach,
except for an excusable and not unnatural helplessness at the crisis of
the elopement, and his utterances are the most acutely delightful in the
consciously humorous kind--in the kind that we laugh with, not at--that
even Miss Austen has put into the mouth of any of her characters. It is
difficult to know whether he is most agreeable when talking to his wife,
or when putting Mr. Collins through his paces; but the general sense of
the world has probably been right in preferring to the first rank his
consolation to the former when she maunders over the entail, “My dear,
do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things.
Let us flatter ourselves that_ I _may be the survivor;” and his inquiry
to his colossal cousin as to the compliments which Mr. Collins has just
related as made by himself to Lady Catherine, “May I ask whether these
pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the
result of previous study?” These are the things which give Miss Austen’s
readers the pleasant shocks, the delightful thrills, which are felt by
the readers of Swift, of Fielding, and we may here add, of Thackeray, as
they are felt by the readers of no other English author of fiction
outside of these four._

_The goodness of the minor characters in_ Pride and Prejudice _has been
already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties
difficult in any space, and impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have
glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely
amusing or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of Kitty and
Lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have
differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and
vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common
weaknesses of woman at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has
taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her;
not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting
traditional appendices which Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming
her privately to marry “one of Mr. Philips’s clerks.” The habits of
first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and
singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but
perhaps poor Mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings
in that Fordyce-belectured generation. It is at any rate difficult not
to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and
respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards Mr.
Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia’s fall. I sometimes wish
that the exigencies of the story had permitted Miss Austen to unite
these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe
poor Mrs. Bennet’s anguish over the entail._

_The Bingleys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, Miss Darcy and Miss de
Bourgh, Jane, Wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment,
further than the remark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, though
delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between
comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and
that Wickham (though something of Miss Austen’s hesitation of touch in
dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in
drab of another. Only genius could have made Charlotte what she is, yet
not disagreeable; Wickham what he is, without investing him either with
a cheap Don Juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality. But the
hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed._

_Darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of
Miss Austen’s heroes; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney,
whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into
comparison. It has sometimes, I believe, been urged that his pride is
unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while
his falling in love at all is not extremely probable. Here again I
cannot go with the objectors. Darcy’s own account of the way in which
his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and
nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a_ causa verior _for its
sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of Elizabeth’s
scornful refusal acting on a nature_ ex hypothesi _generous. Nothing in
even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of
his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of Pemberley. Had he
been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting
under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come
husband-hunting. His being neither is exactly consistent with the
probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really
injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his being in
love, Elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that
phenomenon as Darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state,
only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal
charm._

_The secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from Miss Austen
herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather
to be felt than to be explained. Elizabeth of course belongs to the_
allegro _or_ allegra _division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was
always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and
except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate
sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing
about her looks. But her chief difference from other heroines of the
lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly clever--almost
strong-minded, in the better sense of that objectionable word--and
secondly in her being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all her
propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue. Elizabeth can give
at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never
“scratches,” and she never attacks first. Some of the merest
obsoletenesses of phrase and manner give one or two of her early
speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to
serious business, as in the great proposal scene with Darcy (which is,
as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the
final ladies’ battle with Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then
too she is a perfectly natural girl. She does not disguise from herself
or anybody that she resents Darcy’s first ill-mannered personality with
as personal a feeling. (By the way, the reproach that the ill-manners of
this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same
kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have
been heard in more than one ball-room during this very year from persons
who ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy.) And she lets the
injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family
aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world._

_Still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a
common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her
playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a
certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age.
Nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent
Darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the
idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating Wickham.
Elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing_ viraginous, _nothing of the
“New Woman” about her, has by nature what the best modern (not “new”)
women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea
that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will away with
her if they can. Though not in the least “impudent and mannish grown,”
she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of
passion common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen’s day was so
invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of
these qualities, that she has not made Elizabeth outwardly passionate.
But I, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have
married Darcy just as willingly without Pemberley as with it, and
anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers’
conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked
to the Della Cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the Della
Cruscans of this._

_And, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of
charm?--it is there. There were better sense in the sad mechanic
exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not. In
the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young
ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at
least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can
help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order, Elizabeth
Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara
Grant. I should have been most in love with Beatrix and Argemone; I
should, I think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred Diana
and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do not know that any one
of the four can come into competition with Elizabeth._

_GEORGE SAINTSBURY._




[Illustration: List of Illustrations.]


                                                                    PAGE

Frontispiece                                                          iv

Title-page                                                             v

Dedication                                                           vii

Heading to Preface                                                    ix

Heading to List of Illustrations                                     xxv

Heading to Chapter I.                                                  1

“He came down to see the place”                                        2

Mr. and Mrs. Bennet                                                    5

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”                                      6

“I’m the tallest”                                                      9

“He rode a black horse”                                               10

“When the party entered”                                              12

“She is tolerable”                                                    15

Heading to Chapter IV.                                                18

Heading to Chapter V.                                                 22

“Without once opening his lips”                                       24

Tailpiece to Chapter V.                                               26

Heading to Chapter VI.                                                27

“The entreaties of several”                                           31

“A note for Miss Bennet”                                              36

“Cheerful prognostics”                                                40

“The apothecary came”                                                 43

“Covering a screen”                                                   45

“Mrs. Bennet and her two youngest girls”                              53

Heading to Chapter X.                                                 60

“No, no; stay where you are”                                          67

“Piling up the fire”                                                  69

Heading to Chapter XII.                                               75

Heading to Chapter XIII.                                              78

Heading to Chapter XIV.                                               84

“Protested that he never read novels”                                 87

Heading to Chapter XV.                                                89

Heading to Chapter XVI.                                               95

“The officers of the ----shire”                                       97

“Delighted to see their dear friend again”                           108

Heading to Chapter XVIII.                                            113

“Such very superior dancing is not often seen”                       118

“To assure you in the most animated language”                        132

Heading to Chapter XX.                                               139

“They entered the breakfast-room”                                    143

Heading to Chapter XXI.                                              146

“Walked back with them”                                              148

Heading to Chapter XXII.                                             154

“So much love and eloquence”                                         156

“Protested he must be entirely mistaken”                             161

“Whenever she spoke in a low voice”                                  166

Heading to Chapter XXIV.                                             168

Heading to Chapter XXV.                                              175

“Offended two or three young ladies”                                 177

“Will you come and see me?”                                          181

“On the stairs”                                                      189

“At the door”                                                        194

“In conversation with the ladies”                                    198

“Lady Catherine,” said she, “you have given me a treasure”           200

Heading to Chapter XXX.                                              209

“He never failed to inform them”                                     211

“The gentlemen accompanied him”                                      213

Heading to Chapter XXXI.                                             215

Heading to Chapter XXXII.                                            221

“Accompanied by their aunt”                                          225

“On looking up”                                                      228

Heading to Chapter XXXIV.                                            235

“Hearing herself called”                                             243

Heading to Chapter XXXVI.                                            253

“Meeting accidentally in town”                                       256

“His parting obeisance”                                              261

“Dawson”                                                             263

“The elevation of his feelings”                                      267

“They had forgotten to leave any message”                            270

“How nicely we are crammed in!”                                      272

Heading to Chapter XL.                                               278

“I am determined never to speak of it again”                         283

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”                           285

“Tenderly flirting”                                                  290

The arrival of the Gardiners                                         294

“Conjecturing as to the date”                                        301

Heading to Chapter XLIV.                                             318

“To make herself agreeable to all”                                   321

“Engaged by the river”                                               327

Heading to Chapter XLVI.                                             334

“I have not an instant to lose”                                      339

“The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”                        345

The Post                                                             359

“To whom I have related the affair”                                  363

Heading to Chapter XLIX.                                             368

“But perhaps you would like to read it”                              370

“The spiteful old ladies”                                            377

“With an affectionate smile”                                         385

“I am sure she did not listen”                                       393

“Mr. Darcy with him”                                                 404

“Jane happened to look round”                                        415

“Mrs. Long and her nieces”                                           420

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you”                             422

Heading to Chapter LVI.                                              431

“After a short survey”                                               434

“But now it comes out”                                               442

“The efforts of his aunt”                                            448

“Unable to utter a syllable”                                         457

“The obsequious civility”                                            466

Heading to Chapter LXI.                                              472

The End                                                              476




[Illustration: ·PRIDE AND PREJUDICE·




Chapter I.]


It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
property of some one or other of their daughters.

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?”

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

“But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it.”

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

“Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his wife, impatiently.

“_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”

[Illustration:

“He came down to see the place”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

This was invitation enough.

“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
in the house by the end of next week.”

“What is his name?”

“Bingley.”

“Is he married or single?”

“Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”

“How so? how can it affect them?”

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can you be so tiresome? You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”

“Is that his design in settling here?”

“Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes.”

“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go--or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
party.”

“My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.”

“In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.”

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood.”

“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”

“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new
comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
him, if you do not.”

“You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.”

“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.”

“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters.”

“Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take
delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”

“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these twenty years at least.”

“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”

“But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”

“It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them.”

“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.”

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she
fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.

[Illustration: M^{r.} & M^{rs.} Bennet

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




[Illustration:

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER II.


[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his
wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with,--

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”

“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,” said her mother,
resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”

“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him.”

“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her.”

“No more have I,” said Mr. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you.”

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty, fretfully. “When
is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back till
the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for
she will not know him herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_.”

“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?”

“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore,
as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I
will take it on myself.”

The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
nonsense!”

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books, and make extracts.”

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.

“While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to Mr.
Bingley.”

“I am sick of Mr. Bingley,” cried his wife.

“I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did you not tell me so before? If I
had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished--that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while.

“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a
word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Mr. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was
shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I’m the tallest.”

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner.

[Illustration: “I’m the tallest”]




[Illustration:

     “He rode a black horse”
]




CHAPTER III.


[Illustration]

Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained.

“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,”
said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten
minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper
window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had
Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a
little by starting the idea of his

[Illustration:

     “When the Party entered”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a
report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and
seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a
number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing
that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London,
his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the
assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his
two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after
his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was
much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding,
disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his
friend.

Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his
friend to join it.

“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.”

“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this, it
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.”

“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see,
uncommonly pretty.”

“_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

“Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

[Illustration:

“She is tolerable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said,
“She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.

The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her
mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a
book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s
views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he
had a very different story to hear.

“Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her
twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----”

“If he had had any compassion for _me_,” cried her husband impatiently,
“he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of
his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”

“Oh, my dear,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “I am quite delighted with him. He
is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never
in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the
lace upon Mrs. Hurst’s gown----”

Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.

“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.


[Illustration]

When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much
she admired him.

“He is just what a young-man ought to be,” said she, “sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!”

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought
likewise to be if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.”

“I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.”

“I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the
good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad,--belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man’s sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was
very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine
ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been
acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but
though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to
look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an
hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient; but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually
giving offence.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him;
there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too
much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
they should not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.




[Illustration: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER V.


[Illustration]

Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The
distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town;
and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about
a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by
business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For,
though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive,
friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James’s had made him
courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth’s intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

“_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet, with civil
self-command, to Miss Lucas. “_You_ were Mr. Bingley’s first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Well, that was very decided, indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_.”

“I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.”

[Illustration: “Without once opening his lips”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Are you quite sure, ma’am? Is not there a little mistake?” said Jane.
“I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”

“Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being
spoke to.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much unless
among his intimate acquaintance. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come
to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.”

“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be
proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his
sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs.
Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would; and the argument ended only with the visit.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.


[Illustration]

The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
was returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the
good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards the
two eldest. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of
everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising,
in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. It
was generally evident, whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an
uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the
suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss
Lucas.

“It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the
dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show _more_
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.”

“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If _I_ can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to
discover it too.”

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal
it, he must find it out.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling
in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet she
cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both
like Vingt-un better than Commerce, but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”

“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.”

“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley’s attention to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had
hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were
assembled.

“What does Mr. Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?”

“That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.”

“But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

[Illustration: “The entreaties of several” [_Copyright 1894 by George
Allen._]]

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said,--

“Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well
just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?”

“With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady
energetic.”

“You are severe on us.”

“It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”

“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a
musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however,
she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is
of course familiar with--‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’--and
I shall keep mine to swell my song.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she
would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.

Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.

Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas
was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:--

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There is
nothing like dancing, after all. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished societies.”

“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.”

Sir William only smiled. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he
continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.”

“You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.”

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
you often dance at St. James’s?”

“Never, sir.”

“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”

“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“You have a house in town, I conclude?”

Mr. Darcy bowed.

“I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of
superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.”

He paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her,--

“My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.”
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,--

“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half hour.”

“Mr. Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.

“He is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we
cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a
partner?”

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured
her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,--

“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”

“I should imagine not.”

“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many
evenings in this manner,--in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of
your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the
noise--the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these
people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”

“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,--

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favourite? and pray when am I to wish you
joy?”

“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”

“Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.”

He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed along.




[Illustration:

     “A note for Miss Bennet”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER VII.


[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had been a clerk to their
father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.

The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and
to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions:
their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of
news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn
some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in
the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was
the head-quarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting
intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the
officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity
unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of
an ensign.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed,--

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.”

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and
her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London.

“I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

“Yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish.”

“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I
liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in
his regimentals.”

“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,--

“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”

“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.

     /* NIND “My dear friend, */

     “If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our
     lives; for a whole day’s _tête-à-tête_ between two women can never
     end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
     this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
     Yours ever,

“CAROLINE BINGLEY.”

“With the officers!” cried Lydia: “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.”

“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bennet; “that is very unlucky.”

“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.

“No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night.”

“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home.”

“Oh, but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley’s chaise to go to Meryton;
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”

“I had much rather go in the coach.”

“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are not they?”

[Illustration: Cheerful prognostics]

“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”

“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s purpose
will be answered.”

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad
day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it
rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet, more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next
morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:--

     /* NIND “My dearest Lizzie, */

     “I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
     imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will
     not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also on
     my seeing Mr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear
     of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and a
     headache, there is not much the matter with me.

“Yours, etc.”

“Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die--it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.”

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. People do not die of little
trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays
there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the
carriage.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the
carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was
her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.”

“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the
horses?”

“No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing,
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”

“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”

“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.

“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter, before he goes.”

In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.

She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother’s manners there was something better than politeness--there was
good-humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst
nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to
the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well
enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together,
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended
her.

When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came; and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact
nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring
back a supply of clothes.

[Illustration:

“The Apothecary came”
]




[Illustration:

“covering a screen”
]




CHAPTER VIII.


[Illustration]

At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed,--a mixture of pride and impertinence:
she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst
thought the same, and added,--

“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really
looked almost wild.”

“She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!”

“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office.”

“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well
when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice.”

“_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such
an exhibition.”

“Certainly not.”

“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum.”

“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said
Bingley.

“I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper,
“that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine
eyes.”

“Not at all,” he replied: “they were brightened by the exercise.” A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again,--

“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,--she is really a very sweet
girl,--and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
chance of it.”

“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton?”

“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”

“That is capital,” added her sister; and they both laughed heartily.

“If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,” cried Bingley, “it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.”

“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,” replied Darcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend’s vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and
when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”

“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.”

“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I
am _not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.”

“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and
I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.”

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table
where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her
others; all that his library afforded.

“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into.”

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.

“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!”

“It ought to be good,” he replied: “it has been the work of many
generations.”

“And then you have added so much to it yourself--you are always buying
books.”

“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.”

“Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley.”

“I wish it may.”

“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.”

“With all my heart: I will buy Pemberley itself, if Darcy will sell it.”

“I am talking of possibilities, Charles.”

“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.”

Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little
attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest
sister, to observe the game.

“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley: “will
she be as tall as I am?”

“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or
rather taller.”

“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.”

“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are.”

“All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?”

“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am
sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished.”

“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my
acquaintance that are really accomplished.”

“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.

“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.”

“Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

“Oh, certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all
this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half deserved.”

“All this she must possess,” added Darcy; “and to all she must yet add
something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive
reading.”

“I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”

“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?”

“_I_ never saw such a woman. _I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united.”

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.

“Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is
one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other
sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it
succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
“there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.”

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.

Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones’s being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to
his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.




[Illustration:

M^{rs} Bennet and her two youngest girls

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER IX.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.”

“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal.”

“You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
“that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.”

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
_her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is
equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
hope, though you have but a short lease.”

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”

“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth.

“You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards her.

“Oh yes--I understand you perfectly.”

“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through, I am afraid, is pitiful.”

“That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”

“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”

“I did not know before,” continued Bingley, immediately, “that you were
a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”

“Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
least that advantage.”

“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society.”

“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.”

“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a
country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.”

Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph,--

“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?”

“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and
when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”

“Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.”

“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true.”

“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.

“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley--is not he? so much the man of fashion! so
genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.”

“Did Charlotte dine with you?”

“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I
assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think
Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend.”

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said Bingley.

“Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast
of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my
brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my
sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.
But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. “There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”

“I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,” said Darcy.

“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part,
indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners and her
own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was
very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer
to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear.

“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?”

Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on _fine eyes_.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.


[Illustration]

The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, did not appear.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.

Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in unison with her opinion of each.

“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”

He made no answer.

“You write uncommonly fast.”

“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”

“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”

“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.”

“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”

“I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend
pens remarkably well.”

“Thank you--but I always mend my own.”

“How can you contrive to write so even?”

He was silent.

“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp,
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley’s.”

“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At
present I have not room to do them justice.”

“Oh, it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?”

“They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me
to determine.”

“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease cannot write ill.”

“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much
for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?”

“My style of writing is very different from yours.”

“Oh,” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”

“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them; by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.”

“Your humility, Mr. Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.”

“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.”

“And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?”

“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”

“I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you
would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay
till next week,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not
go--and, at another word, might stay a month.”

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself.”

“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a
circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.”

“Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?”

“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter--Darcy must speak for
himself.”

“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety.”

“To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.”

“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.”

“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange
with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?”

“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do.”

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

“I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend. “You dislike an argument,
and want to silence this.”

“Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”

“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish his letter.”

Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for the indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself.

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because
he disliked her was still more strange. She could only imagine, however,
at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her,--

“Do you not feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?”

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence.

“Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you
dare.”

“Indeed I do not dare.”

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really
believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger.

Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the
next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after
the officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.”

[Illustration:

     “No, no; stay where you are”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?”

“Oh yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it
taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”

“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.”

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.

“I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.

“You used us abominably ill,” answered Mrs. Hurst, “running away without
telling us that you were coming out.”

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said,--

“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
avenue.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered,--

“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to
uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-bye.”

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.




[Illustration:

     “Piling up the fire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XI.


[Illustration]

When the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and
seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room,
where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of
pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were
during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers
of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment
with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their
acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and
attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire,
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the
door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.

When tea was over Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book. Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy’s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it
is to spend an evening in this way! I declare, after all, there is no
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.”

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said,--

“By the bye Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.”

“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send
round my cards.”

“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
day.”

“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say; but it would not be
near so much like a ball.”

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and,
turning to Elizabeth, said,--

“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude.”

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his
meaning--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him.

“Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be
severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask
nothing about it.”

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his
two motives.

“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, I should be
completely in your way; and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.”

“Oh, shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. “I never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”

“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. “We
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”

“But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has not
yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! No,
no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose
ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr.
Darcy may hug himself.”

“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a
laugh.”

“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. The
wisest and best of men,--nay, the wisest and best of their actions,--may
be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.”

“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am
not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what
you are without.”

“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of
my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.”

“Such as vanity and pride.”

“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind--pride will be always under good regulation.”

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

“Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,” said Miss Bingley;
“and pray what is the result?”

“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
himself without disguise.”

“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My
feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost is lost for
ever.”

“_That_ is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.”

“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”

“And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate everybody.”

“And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully to misunderstand
them.”

“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst.”

Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.


[Illustration]

In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right.

To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He
wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at
one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII


[Illustration]

“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”

Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane--you never dropped a word of this--you sly
thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.
But--good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got
to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill this
moment.”

“It is _not_ Mr. Bingley,” said her husband; “it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.”

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus
explained:--“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a
fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy,
and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who,
when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he
pleases.”

“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.”

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.

“It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet; “and
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself.”

“No, that I am sure I shall not: and I think it was very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father
did before him?”

“Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.”

     /* RIGHT “Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, _15th October_. */

“Dear Sir,

     “The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the
     misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
     breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts,
     fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be
     on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be
     at variance.”--‘There, Mrs. Bennet.’--“My mind, however, is now
     made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter,
     I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of
     the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis
     de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the
     valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
     endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
     Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies
     which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman,
     moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
     of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on
     these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of
     good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my
     being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly
     overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered
     olive branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
     means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
     apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make
     them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. If you should
     have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself
     the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday,
     November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your
     hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do
     without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting
     to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other
     clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir,
     with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your
     well-wisher and friend,

“WILLIAM COLLINS.”

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”
said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again.”

“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required.

“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out. There
is something very pompous in his style. And what can he mean by
apologizing for being next in the entail? We cannot suppose he would
help it, if he could. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “his letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.”

To Catherine and Lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall,
heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not
doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,--

“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly.”

“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”

“Ah, sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things,
I know, are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.”

“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted----”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet’s
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired;
and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its
cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured
him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged
pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a
quarter of an hour.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV


[Illustration]

During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect
he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or
two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs.

“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “and I
dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?”

“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her Ladyship’s residence.”

“I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she any family?”

“She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.”

“Ah,” cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?”

“She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.”

“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court.”

“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet; “and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?”

“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.”

Mr. Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd
as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
in his pleasure.

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over,
glad to invite him

[Illustration:

“Protested
that he never read novels”      H.T Feb 94
]

to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book
was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be
from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon,
protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia
exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he
chose “Fordyce’s Sermons.” Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and
before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she
interrupted him with,--

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away
Richard? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me
so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,--

“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”

Then, turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs.
Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV.


[Illustration]

Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of
his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good
deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he
felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour’s _tête-à-tête_ with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession;--her
_eldest_ daughter she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her to
hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before, was now high in her good graces.

Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten: every sister
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and
go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_. Their eyes
were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and
nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with an officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very
Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and
he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger’s air, all
wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible
to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting
something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the
pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same
spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day
before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in
their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted
only regimentals to make him completely charming. His appearance was
greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction
was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation--a
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group
the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on
purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they
were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and Elizabeth
happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other,
was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour,
one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments,
touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return.
What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was
impossible not to long to know.

In another minute Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Philips’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s
pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
Philips’s throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
invitation.

Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from
their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly
expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own
carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if
she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shopboy in the street, who had
told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield,
because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed
towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with
her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more,
apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with
her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be
justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to
her notice. Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good
breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to
by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she
could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had
brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s
commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the last hour,
she said, as he walked up and down the street,--and had Mr. Wickham
appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation;
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid,
disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the
next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to; and Mrs. Philips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured,
with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or
both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such
behaviour than her sister.

Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs.
Philips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for
she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI.


[Illustration]

As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the
girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in
the house.

When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour
at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. Philips understood from him what Rosings
was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper’s room.

In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the
improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Philips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantel-piece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.
The gentlemen did approach: and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The
officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr, Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle Philips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

[Illustration:

“The officers of the ----shire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the
probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest,
dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the
skill of the speaker.

With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee and muffin.

When the card tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obliging her,
in return, by sitting down to whist.

“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to
improve myself; for in my situation of life----” Mrs. Philips was very
thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him,
though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told,
the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even
mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.

“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, “he is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand.”

“Yes,” replied Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten
thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of
giving you certain information on that head than myself--for I have been
connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.”

Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?”

“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth, warmly. “I have spent
four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
disagreeable.”

“I have no right to give _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_ to
be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish--and, perhaps, you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.”

“Upon my word I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in the
neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find
him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”

“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short
interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”

“I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man.”

Wickham only shook his head.

“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is
likely to be in this country much longer.”

“I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”

“Oh no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_ he must go. We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim to all the world--a sense of
very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is.
His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be
in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a
thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father.”

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.

Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he
had yet seen, and speaking of the latter, especially, with gentle but
very intelligible gallantry.

“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added,
“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I know it to be a
most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend Denny tempted me
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them.
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.
A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church; and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now.”

“Indeed!”

“Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere.”

“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could _that_ be? How could his
will be disregarded? Why did not you seek legal redress?”

“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing.
Certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I
was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm unguarded temper, and I
may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too
freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very
different sort of men, and that he hates me.”

“This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.”

“Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.”

Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
ever as he expressed them.

“But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? what can
have induced him to behave so cruelly?”

“A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
of preference which was often given me.”

“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
him, I had not thought so very ill of him--I had supposed him to be
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this!”

After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition
must be dreadful.”

“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “_I_ can
hardly be just to him.”

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable.” But she contented herself
with--“And one, too, who had probably been his own companion from
childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest
manner.”

“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Philips,
appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use
to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the
Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence;
and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it
to be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_ as of affection to myself.”

“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you. If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,--for
dishonesty I must call it.”

“It _is_ wonderful,” replied Wickham; “for almost all his actions may be
traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend. It has
connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling. But we are none
of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
impulses even than pride.”

“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?”

“Yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for he is very proud of what his
father was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to
degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up
as the most attentive and best of brothers.”

“What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?”

He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to
speak ill of a Darcy; but she is too much like her brother,--very, very
proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is
nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death her
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
education.”

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying,--

“I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley. How can Mr. Bingley,
who seems good-humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you
know Mr. Bingley?”

“Not at all.”

“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is.”

“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not
want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth
his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a
very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride
never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,--allowing
something for fortune and figure.”

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table, and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips. The usual inquiries as to his success were
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every point;
but when Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured
her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance;
that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not
make herself uneasy.

“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a
card table they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There
are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.”

Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations
were very intimately acquainted with the family of De Bourgh.

“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a
living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”

“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.”

“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
yesterday.”

“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
self-destined to another.

“Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
daughter; but, from some particulars that he has related of her
Ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of
her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”

“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have
not seen her for many years; but I very well remember that I never liked
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who
chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of
the first class.”

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put
an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of
Mrs. Philips’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to
everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as
they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.




[Illustration:

     “delighted to see their dear friend again”
]




CHAPTER XVII.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley’s regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained.

“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or
other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.”

“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? Do clear _them_, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in such a
manner,--one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Oh no.”

“I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on than that
Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not
so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”

“It is difficult, indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to
think.”

“I beg your pardon;--one knows exactly what to think.”

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr.
Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when
the affair became public.

The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom
they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was
fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see
their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their
separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention;
avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy’s look
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she
had no disinclination for it.

“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough. I
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody.”

Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s invitation, and if he
did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke,
either from the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance.

“I am by no means of opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of
this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can
have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a
preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
engaged by Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins
instead!--her liveliness had been never worse timed. There was no help
for it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness and her own was perforce
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accepted with as
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of
being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
was exceedingly agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and,
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time;
for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was
such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No
aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses
for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some
trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement
of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on
Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
endurable to Kitty and Lydia.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII.


[Illustration]

Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of
meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the
dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for Mr. Darcy’s
pleasure, in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this
was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
pronounced by his friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business
the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant
smile,--

“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if
he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.”

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth; and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling
of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in
speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
spirits; and, having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she
had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary
transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her
particular notice. The two first dances, however, brought a return of
distress: they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and
solemn, apologizing instead of attending, and often moving wrong
without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a
disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her
release from him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without
knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
mind: Charlotte tried to console her.

“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”

“Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an
evil.”

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man often times his consequence. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours’ looks their equal amazement in beholding it.
They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at
first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it
would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk,
she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again
silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time,
with--

“It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. _I_ talked about the
dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the
room, or the number of couples.”

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
said.

“Very well; that reply will do for the present. Perhaps, by-and-by, I
may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but
_now_ we may be silent.”

“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”

“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.”

“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?”

“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb.”

“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,”
said he. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_
think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.”

“I must not decide on my own performance.”

He made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance.”

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his
features, but he said not a word; and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said,--

“Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may insure his
_making_ friends; whether he may be equally capable of _retaining_ them,
is less certain.”

“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth,
with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
his life.”

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
that moment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but, on perceiving Mr.
Darcy, he stopped, with a bow of superior courtesy, to compliment him on
his dancing and his partner.

“I have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the
first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you: and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing
at her sister and Bingley), shall take place. What congratulations will
then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy;--but let me not interrupt you, sir.
You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of
that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”

[Illustration:

“Such very superior dancing is not
often seen.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
he turned to his partner, and said,--

“Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking
of.”

“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have
interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for
themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success,
and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.

“Books--oh no!--I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings.”

“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”

“No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else.”

“The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?” said he,
with a look of doubt.

“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said; for her
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave;--that your resentment, once created, was
unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_?”

“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.

“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”

“I hope not.”

“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first.”

“May I ask to what these questions tend?”

“Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she, endeavouring
to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”

“And what is your success?”

She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

“I can readily believe,” answered he, gravely, “that reports may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”

“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity.”

“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied.
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for
in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her,
which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
another.

They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards her, and,
with an expression of civil disdain, thus accosted her,--

“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham?
Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand
questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his
other communications, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr.
Darcy’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give
implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to Mr. Darcy’s using
him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always
remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a
most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very
well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame; that he cannot bear
to hear George Wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he
could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he
was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way.
His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and
I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this
discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his
descent, one could not expect much better.”

“His guilt and his descent appear, by your account, to be the same,”
said Elizabeth, angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing
worse than of being the son of Mr. Darcy’s steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, he informed me himself.”

“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.
“Excuse my interference; it was kindly meant.”

“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if
you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude
for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave
way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.

“I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her
sister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person, in which case
you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of his
history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has
received; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his
sister’s, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am
afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s
regard.”

“Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself.”

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”

“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
perfectly satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”

“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
him _conditionally_ only.”

“I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly,
“but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.
Bingley’s defence of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of
both gentlemen as I did before.”

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy though modest hopes which Jane entertained of
Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,
and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate
as to make a most important discovery.

“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation to my patroness. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
this house the names of his cousin Miss De Bourgh, and of her mother,
Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would
have thought of my meeting with--perhaps--a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do,
and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”

“You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy?”

“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. It will be in my power to
assure him that her Ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme; assuring him
that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as
an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it
was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with
the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she ceased
speaking, replied thus,--

“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your
excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your
understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference
between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those
which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider
the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank
in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the
same time maintained. You must, therefore, allow me to follow the
dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform
what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by
your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide,
though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education
and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like
yourself;” and with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose
reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at
being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with
a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if
hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,”
“Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him
expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with
unrestrained wonder; and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him to speak,
replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not
discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying,
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made
her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that
very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could
bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring
even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly
saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her,
lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore,
she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within
one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was
talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing
else but of her expectation that Jane would be soon married to Mr.
Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable
of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such
a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them,
were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a
comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be
certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It
was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as
Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men;
and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to
consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might
not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary
to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such
occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life. She
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible
whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

“What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.”

“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be to you
to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by
so doing.”

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and
blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity.

At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken.
Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she
had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of
complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song.
Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and
she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience
which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving
amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be
prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute
began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display;
her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies.
She looked at Jane to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly
talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making
signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
impenetrably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,
and, when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,--

“That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough.
Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

“If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to
music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such
an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards
everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I
cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who
should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody
connected with the family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded
his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the
room. Many stared--many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr.
Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for
having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a half-whisper to Lady
Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and
she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or
the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he
could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the
room. He assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent
to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend
himself to her; and that he should therefore make a point of remaining
close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a
project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who
often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s conversation
to herself.

She was at least free from the offence of Mr. Darcy’s further notice:
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it.

The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a
manœuvre of Mrs. Bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an
hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long
speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord,
how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and
addressed herself particularly to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy
he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time,
without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful
pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of
waiting on her after his return from London, whither he was obliged to
go the next day for a short time.

Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins she thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.




[Illustration:

     “to assure you in the most animated language”
]




CHAPTER XIX.


[Illustration]

The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his
declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the
moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding
Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,--

“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
course of this morning?”

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet instantly answered,--

“Oh dear! Yes, certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am sure
she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And
gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth
called out,--

“Dear ma’am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse
me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am
going away myself.”

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will stay where you are.” And
upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
to escape, she added, “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
Mr. Collins.”

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment’s
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried
to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began,--

“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected
mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport
of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as
soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my
future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that she could not
use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and
he continued,--

“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add
very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps I ought to
have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
left Hunsford,--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss De Bourgh’s footstool,--that she said, ‘Mr. Collins, you
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a
gentlewoman for _my_ sake, and for your _own_; let her be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not be
for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mother’s
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.”

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline
them.”

“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
third time. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have
just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”

“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is rather an
extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
would make _you_ so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.”

“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. Collins,
very gravely--“but I cannot imagine that her Ladyship would at all
disapprove of you. And you may be certain that when I have the honour of
seeing her again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty,
economy, and other amiable qualifications.”

“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be
considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus
spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus
addressed her,--

“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the
first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character.”

“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, “you puzzle me
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
may convince you of its being one.”

“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses are merely words of course. My reasons for
believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer
would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my
connections with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your
own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into
further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
Your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must,
therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I
shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”

“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant
female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the
truth from her heart.”

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; “and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable.”

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no
reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he
persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XX.


[Illustration]

Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.

This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet: she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
and could not help saying so.

“But depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is
a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
I will _make_ her know it.”

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but if she
is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If, therefore, she
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.”

“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. “Lizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
husband, called out, as she entered the library,--

“Oh, Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
not have _her_.”

Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by
her communication.

“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had
finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”

“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”

“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems a hopeless business.”

“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
marrying him.”

“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”

Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library.

“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?”

Elizabeth replied that it was.

“Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?”

“I have, sir.”

“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?”

“Yes, or I will never see her again.”

“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_.”

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.

“What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way? You promised me
to _insist_ upon her marrying him.”

“My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be.”

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner
varied, however, her determination never did.

Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”

[Illustration:

     “they entered the breakfast room”
]

Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her
family. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added, in a melancholy tone;
“for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves.”

Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.

“Ay, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as unconcerned as
may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she
can have her own way. But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take it
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking
to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it
is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation.
She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,--

“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together.”

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected
conversation:--

“Oh, Mr. Collins!”

“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point.
Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to
inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man
who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I
trust, I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the
blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your
family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own; but we are all
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI.


[Illustration]

The discussion of Mr. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not
by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by
stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to
her; and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend.

The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill humour or ill
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.

After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt’s, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.

“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near, that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

She highly approved his forbearance; and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendations which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her.
His accompanying them was a double advantage: she felt all the
compliment it offered to herself; and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.

[Illustration: “Walked back with them”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a
sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s
fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as
she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages.
Jane recollected herself soon; and putting the letter away, tried to
join, with her usual cheerfulness, in the general conversation: but
Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention
even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave,
than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs. When they
had gained their own room, Jane, taking out her letter, said, “This is
from Caroline Bingley: what it contains has surprised me a good deal.
The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way
to town; and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear
what she says.”

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr.
Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:--“‘I do not pretend to
regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire except your society, my
dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many
returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the
meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.’” To these
high-flown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of
distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she
saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon
cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his.

“It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness, to which Miss Bingley looks
forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by
them.”

“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you.

“‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are
already there for the winter: I wish I could hear that you, my dearest
friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that I
despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of
whom we shall deprive you.’

“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more this
winter.”

“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he _should_.”

“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing; he is his own master.
But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_. ‘Mr. Darcy is
impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, _we_ are scarcely
less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has
her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection
she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still
more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being
hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to
you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country
without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her
relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?’ What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said
Jane, as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly
declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister;
that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that
if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most
kindly!) to put me on my guard. Can there be any other opinion on the
subject?”

“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?”

“Most willingly.”

“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
in love with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to
town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
does not care about you.”

Jane shook her head.

“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you
together can doubt his affection; Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot: she
is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
case is this:--we are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ inter-marriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
dare say it would succeed if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my
dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that, because Miss Bingley
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
Tuesday; or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”

“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the
foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived
herself.”

“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means.
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”

“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
elsewhere?”

“You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you,
by all means, to refuse him.”

“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling; “you must know, that,
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate.”

“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion.”

“But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required. A thousand things may arise in six months.”

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’s
interested wishes; and she could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of everyone.

She represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on
the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
Jane’s temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart.

They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct;
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of
thinking that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at
Longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration,
that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take
care to have two full courses.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXII.


[Illustration]

The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the
chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good
humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.”

Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
very amiable; but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of:--its object was nothing less than to secure her
from any return of Mr. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them towards
herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
sure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon.
But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character; for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His
reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and
disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained.

Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
interest than the matter had ever

[Illustration:

     “So much love and eloquence”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and
Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins
should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly
expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St.
James’s. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the
occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two
sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved
from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid. Charlotte
herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time
to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr.
Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was
irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would
be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony,
marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable
provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however
uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative
from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of
twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good
luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the
surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she
valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and
probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved
to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of
the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies
moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and
cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again,
whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them.

“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible.”

They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said,--

“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
offending your patroness.”

“My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without her Ladyship’s concurrence.”

“You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.”

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of
your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins,
though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall
now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
my cousin Elizabeth.”

With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished
to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of
her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a
solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and
improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
agreeable companion. But on the following morning every hope of this
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.

The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility
as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
she could not help crying out,--

“Engaged to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte, impossible!”

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
her composure, and calmly replied,--

“Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion,
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?”

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the
prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she
wished her all imaginable happiness.

“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte; “you must be surprised,
very much surprised, so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you.
But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know. I never
was. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. Collins’s
character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state.”

Elizabeth quietly answered “undoubtedly;” and, after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
longer; and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It
was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins’s making two offers
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was
not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte, the wife of Mr. Collins, was a
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing
herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction
that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot
she had chosen.




[Illustration:

     “Protested he must be entirely mistaken.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XXIII.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it,
when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering,
but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than
politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,--

“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment: but Sir William’s good-breeding carried
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters,
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy
together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
console and nothing appease her. Nor did that day wear out her
resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she
could at all forgive their daughter.

Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and
Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton.

Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on
Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away.

Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as
Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelve-month’s abode in the family might have prompted. After
discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them,
with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the
affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained
that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had
been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at
Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight;
for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that
she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would
be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early
day for making him the happiest of men.

Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they
gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continued
absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood.

Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she
was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane’s happiness, and so
dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
frequently recurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters,
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment.

As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth’s: but whatever she felt she was desirous of
concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an
hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. It needed all
Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity.

Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and, luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.

[Illustration:

     “_Whenever she spoke in a low voice_”
]

Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and
wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

“Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_ should be forced
to make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!”

“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the survivor.”

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet; and, therefore, instead of
making any answer, she went on as before.

“I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it.”

“What should not you mind?”

“I should not mind anything at all.”

“Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility.”

“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s own
daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins, too!
Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?”

“I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr. Bennet.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIV.


[Illustration]

Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of
the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on; and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an
inmate of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern
for her sister and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s
assertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy, she paid no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to
the caprice of their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however, been
the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
whatever manner he thought best; but her sister’s was involved in it, as
she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She
could think of nothing else; and yet, whether Bingley’s regard had
really died away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference;
whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had
escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of
him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s
situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying,--

“O that my dear mother had more command over herself! she can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I
will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before.”

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing.

“You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no
reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and
nothing to reproach him with. Thank God I have not _that_ pain. A little
time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better----”

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

“My dear Jane,” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to
you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve.”

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on her sister’s warm affection.

“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. _I_ only want
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be
afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see
of the world the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit
or sense. I have met with two instances lately: one I will not mention,
the other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! in every view it
is unaccountable!”

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will
ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of
situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s respectability, and
Charlotte’s prudent, steady character. Remember that she is one of a
large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin.”

“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man: you know he is, as well as
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him
cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of
danger security for happiness.”

“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” replied
Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than
it does.”

“And men take care that they should.”

“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”

“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to design,”
said Elizabeth; “but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.”

“And do you impute it to either of those?”

“Yes; to the last. But if I go on I shall displease you by saying what I
think of persons you esteem. Stop me, whilst you can.”

“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”

“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”

“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can
secure it.”

“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his
happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride.”

“Beyond a doubt they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane;
“but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me they would not try to
part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of
what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it
in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley’s
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more; and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it
with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what
she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely
the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw
her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s best
comfort was, that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he, one
day, “your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next
to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and
then. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction
among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to
be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough at
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham
be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not
all expect Jane’s good fortune.”

“True,” said Mr. Bennet; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will
always make the most of it.”

Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was
pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter.

Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any
extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of
Hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXV.


[Illustration]

After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to
hope, that shortly after his next return into Hertfordshire, the day
would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave
of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished
his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
another letter of thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her
brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at
Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by
trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger
than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Between the two
eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.

The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business, on her arrival, was to
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her
girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
in it.

“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr.
Bingley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to think
that she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this time, had not it
been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed,
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of
long sleeves.”

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in
the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.
“It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I
am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man,
such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty
girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily
forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”

[Illustration:

     “Offended two or three young ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth; “but it will not
do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen
that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
love with only a few days before.”

“But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as
often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hour’s
acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_
Mr. Bingley’s love?”

“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. Could there be
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”

“Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor
Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would
be prevailed on to go back with us? Change of scene might be of
service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
anything.”

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of her sister’s ready acquiescence.

“I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all,
unless he really comes to see her.”

“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may,
perhaps, have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
never stirs without him.”

“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.”

“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”

But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s
attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she
hoped, by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she
might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
seeing him.

The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s
warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing
them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she
resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment.

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part
of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy’s father, five years before, it was yet in his power
to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been
in the way of procuring.

Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
character perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible
subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with
the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her
tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was
delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the
present Mr. Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember something of
that gentleman’s reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might
agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having
heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud,
ill-natured boy.




[Illustration:

     “Will you come and see me?”
]




CHAPTER XXVI.


[Illustration]

Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on
the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:--

“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you
are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve
yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of
fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against
_him_: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is--you
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”

“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”

“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it.”

“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”

“I beg your pardon. I will try again. At present I am not in love with
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence
of it. Oh, _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father’s opinion of me does
me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are
seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow-creatures, if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that
it would be wiser to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is
not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his
first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In
short, I will do my best.”

“Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very
often. At least you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.”

“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth, with a conscious smile; “very
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine
that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother’s ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now I hope you
are satisfied.”

Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth, having thanked her for
the kindness of her hints, they parted,--a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point without being resented.

Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but, as he took up his abode with the
Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His
marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned
as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured
tone, that she “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the
wedding-day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and
when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s
ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself,
accompanied her out of the room. As they went down stairs together,
Charlotte said,--

“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.”

“_That_ you certainly shall.”

“And I have another favour to ask. Will you come and see me?”

“We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”

“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford.”

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
visit.

“My father and Maria are to come to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and
I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be
as welcome to me as either of them.”

The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say or to hear on the
subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend, and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it ever had been: that it
should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over;
and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been rather than what was. Charlotte’s first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness: there could not but be
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
for her own visit there, to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister, to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is. Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been
lost.

“My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
“I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
to London. I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her.
I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner: I wish I could see her. My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall
soon see them here.”

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister’s being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet
more, the alteration of her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself
no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister
will prove what she felt:--

     “My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
     her better judgment, at my expense, when I confess myself to have
     been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But, my
     dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me
     obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour
     was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at
     all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but,
     if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should
     be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday;
     and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she
     did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she
     made a slight, formal apology for not calling before, said not a
     word of wishing to see me again, and was, in every respect, so
     altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly
     resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I
     cannot help blaming, her. She was very wrong in singling me out as
     she did; I can safely say, that every advance to intimacy began on
     her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been
     acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her
     brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and
     though _we_ know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she
     feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so
     deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may
     feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder,
     however, at her having any such fears now, because if he had at all
     cared about me, we must have met long, long ago. He knows of my
     being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and
     yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to
     persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot
     understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be
     almost tempted to say, that there is a strong appearance of
     duplicity in all this. I will endeavour to banish every painful
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,
     and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear
     from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never
     returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not
     with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely
     glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at
     Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am
     sure you will be very comfortable there.

“Yours, etc.”

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
even wish for any renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every
review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.
Darcy’s sister, as, by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly
regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had
such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than
in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish him happy.

All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and, after relating the
circumstances, she thus went on:--“I am now convinced, my dear aunt,
that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name,
and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_, they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think
her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the
plain.”




[Illustration:

     “On the Stairs”
]




CHAPTER XXVII.


[Illustration]

With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the
plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater
pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire
of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins.
There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would, moreover, give
her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of
spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as
perfect as plan could be.

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.

The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what
she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that,
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
and pleasing.

Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think
him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
she had known Sir William’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’s
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when
they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to
hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
acquaintance.

Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and
complimented her on bearing it so well.

“But, my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of girl is Miss King? I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”

“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a
girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
mercenary.”

“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.”

“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.”

“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather’s death
made her mistress of this fortune?”

“No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
poor?”

“But there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so
soon after this event.”

“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?”

“_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.”

“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. _He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.”

“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”

“Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank heaven! I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manners nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all.”

“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.”

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.

“We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs.
Gardiner; “but perhaps, to the Lakes.”

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “My dear, dear
aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what felicity! You give me
fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men
to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! And
when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know where
we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains,
and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling
about its relative situation. Let _our_ first effusions be less
insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.”




[Illustration:

     “At the door”
]




CHAPTER XXVIII.


[Illustration]

Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The paling of Rosings park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with
coming, when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw
instantly that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage:
his formal civility was just what it had been; and he detained her some
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were
in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality, to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’s
offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect,
and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if
wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though
everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him
by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend,
that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr.
Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed,
which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on
Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general
Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire
every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the
fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. To work in his garden was one of his most
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with
the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a
handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband’s
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency, of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often
forgotten.

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
in, observed,--

“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when
service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to
walk home. Her Ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I
_should_ say, one of her Ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman, indeed,” added
Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and
telling again what had been already written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would
pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse
with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened
the door, and met Maria in the landing-place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out,--

[Illustration:

     “In Conversation with the ladies”

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]]

“Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make
haste, and come down this moment.”

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more;
and down they ran into the dining-room which fronted the lane, in quest
of this wonder; it was two ladies, stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate.

“And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
daughter!”

“La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady
Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them. The
other is Miss De Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!”

“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?”

“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours
when Miss De Bourgh comes in.”

“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She
looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will
make him a very proper wife.”

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh looked that
way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.




[Illustration:

     ‘Lady Catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.’

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XXIX.


[Illustration]

Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of
doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady
Catherine’s condescension as he knew not how to admire enough.

“I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by
her Ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening
at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that
it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine
there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so
immediately after your arrival?”

“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William,
“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”

Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.

When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to
Elizabeth,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for
being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved.”

While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of
her Ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas,
who had been little used to company; and she looked forward to her
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
to his presentation at St. James’s.

As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile
across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.

When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment
increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.
Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she
thought she could witness without trepidation.

From the entrance hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed
the servants through an antechamber to the room where Lady Catherine,
her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her Ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it
with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was
performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks
which he would have thought necessary.

In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so completely
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as
marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth’s mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented.

When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly: her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.

The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants,
and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he
had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by
her Ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater. He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity;
and every dish was commended first by him, and then by Sir William, who
was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a
manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady
Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most
gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty
to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready
to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between
Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
the dinnertime. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how
little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and
fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question,
and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be
done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have
her judgment controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great lady’s attention which could furnish her with an
occasion for dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with
Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who, she observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl. She asked her at different times how many sisters
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her
mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her
questions, but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then
observed,--

“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think? For your
sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?”

“A little.”

“Oh then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to ---- you shall try it
some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”

“One of them does.”

“Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do
you draw?”

“No, not at all.”

“What, none of you?”

“Not one.”

“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”

“My mother would have no objection, but my father hates London.”

“Has your governess left you?”

“We never had any governess.”

“No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education.”

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as she assured her that had not
been the case.

“Then who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you must
have been neglected.”

“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
idle certainly might.”

“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe’s
calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. ‘Lady
Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”

“Yes, ma’am, all.”

“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The
younger ones out before the elder are married! Your younger sisters must
be very young?”

“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be much
in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”

“Upon my word,” said her Ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly
for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”

“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your
Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure,--therefore you need not
conceal your age.”

“I am not one-and-twenty.”

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her
party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
expressed her fears of Miss De Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to everything her Ladyship said, thanking her
for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many.
Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes
and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the
arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s, they departed. As
soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her
cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which,
for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But
her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means
satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship’s
praise into his own hands.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXX.


[Illustration]

Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long
enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in
reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room,
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed on to get out.

Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the
commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by
Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.

[Illustration:

     “he never failed to inform them”
]

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses’ reach. This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she
had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where
she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity.

In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy
was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were
not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined
by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have

[Illustration:

“The gentlemen accompanied him.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage
turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the
following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were
two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought
with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----;
and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned,
the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her
husband’s room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the
other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,--

“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me.”

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely
courtesied to him, without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
way; and, after a moment’s pause, added,--

“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
happened to see her there?”

She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the
Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The
subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away.




[Illustration:

“At Church”
]




CHAPTER XXXI.


[Illustration]

Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of
their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the
house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called
at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had
only seen at church.

The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her Ladyship received them
civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.

Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty friend had,
moreover, caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
scruple to call out,--

“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking
of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”

“We were talking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoid
a reply.

“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I
must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music.
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true
enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever
learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her
health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have
performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”

Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency.

“I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady
Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel,
if she does not practise a great deal.”

“I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such advice.
She practises very constantly.”

“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often
tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will
never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs.
Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
Jenkinson’s room. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part
of the house.”

Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and made
no answer.

When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from
her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte,
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’s
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said,--

“You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister _does_ play so well.
There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at
the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to
intimidate me.”

“I shall not say that you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could
not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you
find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact,
are not your own.”

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a
part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree
of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention
all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate,
and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”

“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.

“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”

“You shall hear, then--but prepare for something very dreadful. The
first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at
a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four
dances! I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. He danced only four
dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more
than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy,
you cannot deny the fact.”

“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party.”

“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”

“Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better had I sought an
introduction, but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.”

“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?”

“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”

“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy,
“of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done.”

“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take
the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers
as capable as any other woman’s of superior execution.”

Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have employed your
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy,--

“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.”

Elizabeth looked at Darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his
cousin’s praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.

Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
gentlemen remained at the instrument till her Ladyship’s carriage was
ready to take them all home.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXII.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be
Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her
half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
Darcy only, entered the room.

He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his
intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to
be within.

They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, she observed,--

“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”

“Perfectly so, I thank you.”

She found that she was to receive no other answer; and, after a short
pause, added,--

“I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?”

“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is
at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing.”

“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the
neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same
principle.”

“I should not be surprised,” said Darcy, “if he were to give it up as
soon as any eligible purchase offers.”

Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to him.

He took the hint and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
Collins first came to Hunsford.”

“I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
kindness on a more grateful object.”

“Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”

“Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of
the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest
thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a
prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.”

“It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a
distance of her own family and friends.”

“An easy distance do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.”

“And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day’s
journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.”

“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collins
was settled _near_ her family.”

“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”

As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,--

“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expense of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
the present distance.”

Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn.”

Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,--

“Are you pleased with Kent?”

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from their walk. The _tête-à-tête_
surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his
intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer,
without saying much to anybody, went away.

[Illustration: “Accompanied by their aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was
gone. “My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
have called on us in this familiar way.”

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and, after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former
favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there
was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she
believed he might have the best informed mind.

But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to
propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really
animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.

In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.




[Illustration: “On looking up”]




CHAPTER XXXIII.


[Illustration]

More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first,
that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even the third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about her
pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking of
Rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her
a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day, as she walked, in re-perusing Jane’s last
letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not
written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy,
she saw, on looking up, that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her.
Putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said,--

“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”

“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally
do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the Parsonage.
Are you going much farther?”

“No, I should have turned in a moment.”

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.

“Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she.

“Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He
arranges the business just as he pleases.”

“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
great pleasure in the power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”

“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.
“But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than
many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence.”

“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”

“These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry
where they like.”

“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do.”

“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many in
my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money.”

“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is
the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”

He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,
she soon afterwards said,--

“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
having somebody at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well
for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
likes with her.”

“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he must
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”

“Are you, indeed? And pray what sort of a guardian do you make? Does
your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes
a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
may like to have her own way.”

As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied,--

“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”

“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant, gentlemanlike
man--he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

“Oh yes,” said Elizabeth drily--“Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”

“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in
those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me
in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted
to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose
that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”

“What is it you mean?”

“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be
generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family it
would be an unpleasant thing.”

“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”

“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars; and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”

“Did Mr. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference?”

“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady.”

“And what arts did he use to separate them?”

“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “He
only told me what I have now told you.”

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she
was so thoughtful.

“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your
cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the
judge?”

“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”

“I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
friend’s inclination; or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to
determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy. But,”
she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case.”

“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam; “but it is
lessening the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”

This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of
Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and,
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent
matters till they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him,
_he_ was the cause--his pride and caprice were the cause--of all that
Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a
while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart
in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have
inflicted.

“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s words; and these strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London.

“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of
objection,--all loveliness and goodness as she is! Her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could
anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain,
and respectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought
of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would
not allow that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr.
Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
the want of importance in his friend’s connections than from their want
of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly
governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of
retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.

The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to
her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather
displeased by her staying at home.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXIV.


[Illustration]

When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as
much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy’s
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a
keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to
think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next,
and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be
with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her
spirits, by all that affection could do.

She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering that his
cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.

While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. But
this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
room. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her
in an agitated manner, and thus began:--

“In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you.”

Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement,
and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately
followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the
heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of
tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority, of its being a
degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed
to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the
consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit.

In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost
all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of
all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
his hand. As he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a
favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but his
countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could only
exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks
and she said,--

“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. The feelings which you tell me have long prevented
the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in
overcoming it after this explanation.”

Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his eyes fixed
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed
himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings
dreadful. At length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said,--

“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I
might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”

“I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why, with so evident a design
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my own feelings decided
against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been
favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept
the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the
happiness of a most beloved sister?”

As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
continued,--

“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind.”

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.

“Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.

With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “I have no wish of denying
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been
kinder than towards myself.”

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.

“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike
is founded. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”

“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy,
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an
interest in him?”

“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy, contemptuously,--“yes, his
misfortunes have been great indeed.”

“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth, with energy; “You have
reduced him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You
have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed
for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that
independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done
all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with
contempt and ridicule.”

“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
“is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I
thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But, perhaps,” added he, stopping in his
walk, and turning towards her, “these offences might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my
being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just.
Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when she said,--

“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the
concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.”

She saw him start at this; but he said nothing, and she continued,--

“You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way
that would have tempted me to accept it.”

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on,--

“From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my
acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the
feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of
disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”

“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness.”

And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house. The tumult of
her mind was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself,
and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour. Her
astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by
every review of it. That she should receive an offer of marriage from
Mr. Darcy! that he should have been in love with her for so many months!
so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections
which had made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which
must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost
incredible! it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong
an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal
of what he had done with respect to Jane, his unpardonable assurance in
acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner
which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not
attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his
attachment had for a moment excited.

She continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady
Catherine’s carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter
Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room.




[Illustration:

“Hearing herself called”
]




CHAPTER XXXV.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after
breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her
walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove
which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being
Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was
now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called,
though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again
towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also; and, holding out
a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty
composure, “I have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of
meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” and
then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon
out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of
its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those
offers, which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes,
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your justice.

“Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister,--and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope
to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and
their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them which is due
to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be
offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must
be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd. I had not been long in
Hertfordshire before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley
preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. But
it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any
apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him
in love before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with
you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental
information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to
a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain
event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I
observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive
that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed
in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open,
cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar
regard; and I remained convinced, from the evening’s scrutiny, that
though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite
them by any participation of sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken
here, _I_ must have been in an error. Your superior knowledge of your
sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled
by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been
unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of
your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most
acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart
was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing
her indifferent is certain; but I will venture to say that my
investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or
fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I
believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.
My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night
acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside
in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to
my friend as to me. But there were other causes of repugnance; causes
which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both
instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not
immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The
situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in
comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost
uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and
occasionally even by your father:--pardon me,--it pains me to offend
you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations,
and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you
consolation to consider that to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid
any share of the like censure is praise no less generally bestowed on
you and your eldest sister than it is honourable to the sense and
disposition of both. I will only say, farther, that from what passed
that evening my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every
inducement heightened, which could have led me before to preserve my
friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left
Netherfield for London on the day following, as you, I am certain,
remember, with the design of soon returning. The part which I acted is
now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited
with my own: our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike
sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we
shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. We accordingly
went--and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described and enforced them
earnestly. But however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed
his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have
prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance, which
I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. He had before
believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal,
regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger
dependence on my judgment than on his own. To convince him, therefore,
that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point. To persuade
him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for
having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct, in the whole
affair, on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I
condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him
your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss
Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might
have met without ill consequence is, perhaps, probable; but his regard
did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some
danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me. It is
done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have
nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your
sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which
governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not
yet learnt to condemn them.--With respect to that other, more weighty
accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by
laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he
has _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I
shall relate I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years
the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in
the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service
to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was
therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school, and
afterwards at Cambridge; most important assistance, as his own father,
always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to
give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this
young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the
highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession,
intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years
since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The
vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to
guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the
observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who
had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy
could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree you
only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has
created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding
his real character. It adds even another motive. My excellent father
died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the
last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me to
promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might
allow, and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living
might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of
one thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive mine; and
within half a year from these events Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me
that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should
not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate
pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be
benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying the law, and I
must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very
insufficient support therein. I rather wished than believed him to be
sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his
proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman. The
business was therefore soon settled. He resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection
between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town, I believe, he
chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence; and being
now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and
dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the
decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him,
he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His
circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it,
were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study,
and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present
him to the living in question--of which he trusted there could be little
doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for,
and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will
hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for
resisting every repetition of it. His resentment was in proportion to
the distress of his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in
his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this
period, every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived, I
know not. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my
notice. I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me
to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of
your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left
to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and
myself. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an
establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she went with
the lady who presided over it to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr.
Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior
acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were
most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid he so far
recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a
strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was
persuaded to believe herself in love and to consent to an elopement. She
was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her
imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to
herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended
elopement; and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving
and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father,
acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I
acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public
exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately,
and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham’s
chief object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging
himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have been
complete indeed. This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in
which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely
reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of
falsehood, he has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be
wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning
either. Detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly
not in your inclination. You may possibly wonder why all this was not
told you last night. But I was not then master enough of myself to know
what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here
related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel
Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and
still more as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been
unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If
your abhorrence of _me_ should make _my_ assertions valueless, you
cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and
that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour
to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the
course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.

“FITZWILLIAM DARCY.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXVI.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
its contents. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to
give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of
what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which
hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing
what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s
insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the
real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any
wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done
which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all
pride and insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when
she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her feelings
were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false!
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly
what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his
own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to
the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the
letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on.
But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to
Mr. Wickham’s charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his
entrance into the ----shire militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life,
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told

[Illustration:

     “Meeting accidentally in Town”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power,
she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and
manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue.
She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the
attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone
for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what
Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’
continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him
instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could
remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the
neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in
the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once
more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed
between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at
last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
Fitzwilliam himself--from whom she had previously received the
information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs and whose
character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost
resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness
of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that
Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been
well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Philips’s.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered, also, that till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy’s
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His
attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted his blamelessness in the affair;--that, proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
of irreligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued;--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;--that had his
actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial,
prejudiced, absurd.

“How despicably have I acted!” she cried. “I, who have prided myself on
my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
vanity in useless or blameless distrust. How humiliating is this
discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not
have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were
concerned. Till this moment, I never knew myself.”

From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s explanation
_there_ had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to
give in the other? He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious
of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what
Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice
of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though
fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great
sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
than on hers.

The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but
it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that
Jane’s disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
had ever known before.

After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and
reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so
important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at
length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing
cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as
must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in
missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object. She could think only of her letter.




[Illustration:

“His parting obeisance”
]




CHAPTER XXXVII.


[Illustration]

The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
hastened to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her Ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her
future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
Ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? how
would she have behaved?” were the questions with which she amused
herself.

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings’ party. “I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me!
They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear
Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely--more, I think, than last year. His
attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”

Mr. Collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,--

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you
may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure.”

“I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied
Elizabeth; “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town
next Saturday.”

“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There
can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight.”

“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”

[Illustration:

“Dawson”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can.
Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will
stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you
as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and
as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good
room for one of you--and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be
cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you
large.”

“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan.”

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the
world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr.
Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am
glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”

“My uncle is to send a servant for us.”

“Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of those things. Where shall you change horses?
Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
attended to.”

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey;
and as she did not answer them all herself attention was
necessary--which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a
mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection
must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave
way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a
solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of
unpleasant recollections.

Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or
feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for
ever.

Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy’s
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to
have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.

Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out
her hand to both.




[Illustration:

“The elevation of his feelings.”
]




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


[Illustration]

On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.

“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has yet
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know
how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending
your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had
spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make _her_ feel
the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
solemnity replied,--

“It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your
time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior
society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that
your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation
with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is, indeed, the sort of
extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on
what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In
truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this
humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of
compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences.

“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself, at least, that you will
be able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
other.”

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from
whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such
society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently
regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for
compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry,
and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning
her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed
her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings.

[Illustration:

“They had forgotten to leave any message”
]

“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here.”

Elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.

“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems
but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have
happened!”

“A great many indeed,” said her companion, with a sigh.

“We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
How much I shall have to tell!”

Elizabeth privately added, “And how much I shall have to conceal!”

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner’s
house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt
had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.

It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To know
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate,
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister
further.




[Illustration:

     “How nicely we are crammed in”
]




CHAPTER XXXIX.


[Illustration]

It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet’s carriage was
to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs.
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber.

After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
“Is not this nice? is not this an agreeable surprise?”

“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia; “but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then showing
her purchases,--“Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it
is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better.”

And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
unconcern, “Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight.”

“Are they, indeed?” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.

“They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme,
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to
go, too, of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!”

“Yes,” thought Elizabeth; “_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed,
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!”

“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down to
table. “What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about
a certain person that we all like.”

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he
need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said,--

“Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse
things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad
he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for
my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it?
There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King--there’s for you! She
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”

“And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune.”

“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”

“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane.

“I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
three straws about her. Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
thing?”

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
liberal!

As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and
Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it.

“How nicely we are crammed in!” cried Lydia. “I am glad I brought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.
She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord! how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to
get husbands you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you! and then I would
_chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s! Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes, on purpose to pass for a
lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”

With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia,
assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.

Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth,----

“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects
which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the
table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet
was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various
pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.

“Oh, Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought
we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter.
And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so
loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”

To this, Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures. They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
_me_. I should infinitely prefer a book.”

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
the scheme. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at
home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was
another reason, too, for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Wickham
again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to
_her_, of the regiment’s approaching removal, was indeed beyond
expression. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XL.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no
longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular
in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised,
she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr.
Darcy and herself.

Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him.

“His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his
disappointment.”

“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he has
other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”

“Blame you! Oh, no.”

“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”

“No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”

“But you _will_ know it, when I have told you what happened the very
next day.”

She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane,
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here
collected in one individual! Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear one, without involving the other.

“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr.
Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choose.”

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.

“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so
very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! dear Lizzy,
only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and
with the knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to relate such a
thing of his sister! It is really too distressing, I am sure you must
feel it so.”

“Oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full
of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing
every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me
saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as
light as a feather.”

“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner.”

“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it.”

“I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do.”

“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”

“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now.”

“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I was very
uncomfortable--I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to of what I
felt, no Jane to comfort me, and say that I had not been so very weak,
and vain, and nonsensical, as I knew I had! Oh, how I wanted you!”

“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved.”

“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is
one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand
Wickham’s character.”

Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your own opinion?”

“That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorized me to
make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is
so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
Meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to
it. Wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to
anybody here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found
out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before.
At present I will say nothing about it.”

“You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for
ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.”

The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. She
had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a
fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she
might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something
lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not
relate the other half of Mr. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister
how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge in
which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than
a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in
throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if
that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be
able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner
himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost
all its value!”

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in
love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from
her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often
boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to
every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the
feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those
regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their
tranquillity.

“Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet, one day, “what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Philips so the other day. But I
cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a
very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
everybody, too, who is likely to know.”

[Illustration:

     “I am determined never to speak of it again”
]

“I do not believe that he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”

“Oh, well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come; though I
shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if I was
her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure
Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he
has done.”

But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation she
made no answer.

“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it
will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother,
she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say.”

“No, nothing at all.”

“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes. _They_ will
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it
quite as their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”

“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”

“No; it would have been strange if they had. But I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. _I_ should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.”




[Illustration:

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XLI.


[Illustration]

The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in
the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost
universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.

“Good Heaven! What is to become of us? What are we to do?” would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?”

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
she had herself endured on a similar occasion five-and-twenty years ago.

“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel
Miller’s regiment went away. I thought I should have broke my heart.”

“I am sure I shall break _mine_,” said Lydia.

“If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. Bennet.

“Oh yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagreeable.”

“A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.”

“And my aunt Philips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,”
added Kitty.

Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy’s
objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his
interference in the views of his friend.

But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the
regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good-humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew
about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

“I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,”
said she, “though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,--

“Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little
expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
circumstances.”

“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to
us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and
imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair.”

“Already arisen!” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What! has she frightened away
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows
who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”

“Indeed, you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not
of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our
importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia’s character. Excuse me,--for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character
will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;--a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of
her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty
is also comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh, my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?”

Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and,
affectionately taking her hand, said, in reply,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known,
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest
of her life.”

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
She was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over
unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at
present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp: its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.

[Illustration:

“Tenderly flirting”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and
such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could
have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the
same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the
melancholy conviction of her husband’s never intending to go there
himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leaving
home.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her,
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure;
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined,
with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s
recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you
say that he was at Rosings?”

“Nearly three weeks.”

“And you saw him frequently?”

“Yes, almost every day.”

“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

“Yes, very different; but I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.”

“Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. “And pray
may I ask--” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in
address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his
ordinary style? for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more
serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”

“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was.”

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added,--

“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that,
from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”

Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
accents,--

“You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter
him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that
the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is
merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and
judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I
know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his
wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he
has very much at heart.”

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his side,
of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,--advice which there
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous
happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus
of her sisters were uttered without being heard.




[Illustration:

The arrival of the
Gardiners
]




CHAPTER XLII.


[Illustration]

Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of
domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a
disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
from so ill-judged a direction of talents--talents which, rightly used,
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure, she found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and
sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her
folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked
forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the
camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less
to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
too full of lines under the words to be made public.

After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health,
good-humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything
wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter
came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs.
Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle
of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton
without tears,--an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth
hope, that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably
reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by
some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment
should be quartered in Meryton.

The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing
the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.

With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.”

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away
before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and
Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin
Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One
enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a
suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad.

It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay--Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’s
former residence, and where she had lately learned that some
acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen
all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. It
was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so
much?” said her aunt. “A place, too, with which so many of your
acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
know.”

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many,
she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a fine house
richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the
grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
country.”

Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. The
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its
proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her
alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
to the scheme.

To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.




[Illustration:

     “Conjecturing as to the date”
]




CHAPTER XLIII.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.

The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for
half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of the valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
woody hills; and in front a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was.

The housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from
which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the
distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was
good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered
on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace
it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms, these objects were
taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties
to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture
suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with
admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly
fine,--with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the
furniture of Rosings.

“And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! With
these rooms I might have now been familiarly acquainted! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But, no,” recollecting
herself, “that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”

This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something like regret.

She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really
absent, but had not courage for it. At length, however, the question was
asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds
replied, that he was; adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large
party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had
not by any circumstance been delayed a day!

Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached, and saw
the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
miniatures, over the mantel-piece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how
she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the
picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who
had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the
army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”

Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it.

“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
“is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.”

“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.”

Mrs. Reynolds’ respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of her knowing her master.

“Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”

Elizabeth coloured, and said, “A little.”

“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”

“Yes, very handsome.”

“I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late
master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. He was very fond of them.”

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham’s being among them.

Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when she was only eight years old.

“And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mr. Gardiner.

“Oh, yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished! She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a
new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master: she
comes here to-morrow with him.”

Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks: Mrs. Reynolds, either
from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.

“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”

“Not so much as I could wish, sir: but I dare say he may spend half his
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”

“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”

“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”

“Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who is
good enough for him.”

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.”

“I say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows
him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far;
and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added,
“I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him
ever since he was four years old.”

This was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.
Her keenest attention was awakened: she longed to hear more; and was
grateful to her uncle for saying,--

“There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in
having such a master.”

“Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not
meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he
was always the sweetest tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
world.”

Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Mr. Darcy?” thought she.

“His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.

“Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
as affable to the poor.”

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever
lived. Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will
give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never
saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle
away like other young men.”

“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.

“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”

“Perhaps we might be deceived.”

“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”

On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when
last at Pemberley.

“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows.

Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter
the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever
can give his sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment. There
is nothing he would not do for her.”

The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings:
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked on in quest
of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it
arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with
such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen,
when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in
earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the
gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his
father’s lifetime.

There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt in the height of
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
considered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship! How
much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow! How much of good
or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by
the housekeeper was favourable to his character; and as she stood before
the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon
herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude
than it had ever raised before: she remembered its warmth, and softened
its impropriety of expression.

When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door.

As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also; and while the former was
conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road which led behind it to the stables.

They were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility.

She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she
returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he
uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued together were some of the most
uncomfortable of her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he
spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his
inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay
in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of his thoughts.

At length, every idea seemed to fail him; and after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave.

The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his
figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own
feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and
vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged
thing in the world! How strange must it appear to him! In what a
disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if
she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come?
or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been
only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his
discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that
moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and
again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so
strikingly altered,--what could it mean? That he should even speak to
her was amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her
family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified,
never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.
What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when
he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to
account for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching: but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed
to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was. She longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind; in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice, which was
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing
her, she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with
composure.

At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.

They entered the woods, and, bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening
of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods
overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner
expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be
beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten
miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed
circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among
hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts.
They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of
the scene: it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and
the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the
stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered
it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed
the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of
returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man
about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was
quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less
sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they
met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an
interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance she saw that
he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness,
she began as they met to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not
got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky
recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from
her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said
no more.

Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and
she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had
revolted, in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought
she, “when he knows who they are! He takes them now for people of
fashion.”

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore
it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the
connection was evident: he sustained it, however, with fortitude: and,
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some
relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
his taste, or his good manners.

The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same
time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was
walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of her
wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the
compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was
extreme; and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From
what can it proceed? It cannot be for _me_, it cannot be for _my_ sake
that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not
work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love
me.”

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the
brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in
Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. After a short silence the lady first spoke. She wished him to
know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
very unexpected--“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and, indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in
the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They
will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had been last mentioned
between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, _his_ mind was
not very differently engaged.

“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a
pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?”

The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her,
must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
him think really ill of her.

They now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others; and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind.

He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
there seemed an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that
she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dovedale with
great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her patience
and her ideas were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over.

On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go into
the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they
parted on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house.

The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.

“He is perfectly well-behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.

“There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her
aunt; “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud,
_I_ have seen nothing of it.”

“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”

“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham;
or rather he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his features are
perfectly good. But how came you to tell us that he was so
disagreeable?”

Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could: said that she had liked
him better when they met in Kent than before, and that she had never
seen him so pleasant as this morning.

“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied
her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and
warn me off his grounds.”

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said
nothing.

“From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I really
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the
good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character!
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal
master, I suppose, and _that_, in the eye of a servant, comprehends
every virtue.”

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
his behaviour to Wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as
guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his
relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk, they had
no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, above
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XLIV.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was, consequently,
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own
arrival at Lambton these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a
curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the
livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise
to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt
that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such
a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth’s feelings was every moment increasing. She was quite amazed
at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she
dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in
her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.

Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from
her beyond a monosyllable.

Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother, but there
was sense and good-humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings.

They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was
also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step
was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He
inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and
looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.

To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards
each with an earnest, though guarded, inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what
it was to love. Of the lady’s sensations they remained a little in
doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to
make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom
she endeavoured to give pleasure were pre-possessed in her favour.
Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be
pleased.

[Illustration:

     “To make herself agreeable to all”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh!
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a
like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No
look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing
occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On
this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances
occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted
a recollection of Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of
saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He
observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and
in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long
time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could
reply, he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the
26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning.

It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but
whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far
removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her
that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed,
however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one
day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the
good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would
have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself,
but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected
their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the
change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could
hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the
company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could
result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.

Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and
on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.

Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind
him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.

As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and
she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out. She
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his
favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within her of good-will which could not be
overlooked. It was gratitude;--gratitude, not merely for having once
loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the
petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the
unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been
persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this
accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and
without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner,
where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good
opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such
a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but
gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as
such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no
means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected,
she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his
welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to
depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both
that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still
possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.

It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to them on the very
day of her arrival at Pemberley--for she had reached it only to a late
breakfast--ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it
would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.




[Illustration:

     “Engaged by the river”
]




CHAPTER XLV.


[Illustration]

Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her had
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome
her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know
with how much civility on that lady’s side the acquaintance would now
be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows,
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.

In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves
inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and
her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.

By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she
feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss
Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a
significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
regret that he came.

He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,--

“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire militia removed from Meryton?
They must be a great loss to _your_ family.”

In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name: but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress;
but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone. While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have
refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with
that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connections
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish
which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan; and without
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.

Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage,
Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s
person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her
brother’s recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment
could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave
Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and
amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help
repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

“How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” she cried: “I
never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter.
She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we
should not have known her again.”

However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.

“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see
any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
character; there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which
have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not
like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable.”

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a
determination of making him speak, she continued,--

“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_
a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
one time.”

“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but _that_
was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.

Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of
him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’s
beginning the subject.




[Illustration]




Chapter XLVI.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on
the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been mis-sent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.

They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her
uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one mis-sent must be first attended to; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:--

“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be
assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am
very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and
let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How
thankful am I, that we never let them know what has been said against
him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
know what I have written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what she felt, Elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s short
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated
to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.,
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham, but
no farther; for on entering that place, they removed into a
hackney-coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom.
All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the
London road. I know not what to think. After making every possible
inquiry on that side of London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire,
anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet
and Hatfield, but without any success,--no such people had been seen to
pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and
broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart.
I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. F.; but no one can throw any
blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and
mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many
circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married
privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if _he_
could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia’s connections,
which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything?
Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. is not disposed
to depend upon their marriage: he shook his head when I expressed my
hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother
is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be
better, but this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in
my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed
their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot
wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared
something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is
over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish,
however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen
again to do, what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances
are such, that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as
soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not
afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of
the former. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly,
to try to discover her. What he means to do, I am sure I know not; but
his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the
best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton
again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence my uncle’s advice and
assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately
comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”

“Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a
moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and
impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself
enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s
situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you.
I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed;
I have not an instant to lose.”

“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”

Elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an
accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly.

On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
“Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”

“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well, I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of his

[Illustration:

     “I have not an instant to lose”
]

concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke
again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It
cannot be concealed from anyone. My youngest sister has left all her
friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of--of Mr.
Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. _You_ know him too
well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that
can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.”

Darcy was fixed in astonishment.

“When I consider,” she added, in a yet more agitated voice, “that _I_
might have prevented it! _I_ who knew what he was. Had I but explained
some part of it only--some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had
his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all,
all too late now.”

“I am grieved, indeed,” cried Darcy: “grieved--shocked. But is it
certain, absolutely certain?”

“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond: they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.”

“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?”

“My father has gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s
immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour. But
nothing can be done; I know very well that nothing can be done. How is
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”

Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

“When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character, oh! had I known what
I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up
and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power
was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither
wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all--soon swallowed up
every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the
voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said,--

“I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything
to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern.
Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part,
that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment
you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the
pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”

“Oh, yes! Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible. I know it cannot be long.”

He readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed his sorrow for
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with
only one serious parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’s
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if
otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go
with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched
business. Never since reading Jane’s second letter had she entertained a
hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least
of all her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first
letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise, all astonishment,
that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment
as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not
suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the
intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither
her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy
prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia had
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had been continually
fluctuating, but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now
feel it!

She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room the misery of her impatience
was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing,
by the servant’s account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but
satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the
cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on
the postscript of the last with trembling energy. Though Lydia had never
been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be
deeply affected. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readily
promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no
less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated
by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily
settled. They were to be off as soon as possible. “But what is to be
done about Pemberley?” cried Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was
here when you sent for us;--was it so?”

“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
_That_ is all settled.”

“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”

But wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.




[Illustration:

     “The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”
]




CHAPTER XLVII.


[Illustration]

“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form
such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his Colonel’s family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is
not adequate to the risk.”

“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.

“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’s
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham. Can you, yourself, Lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe
him capable of it?”

“Not perhaps of neglecting his own interest. But of every other neglect
I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare not
hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the
case?”

“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.”

“Oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a
presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road.”

“Well, then,--supposing them to be in London--they may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.”

“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their
marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular
friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intending
to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no
brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father’s
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would
do as little and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.”

“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him,
as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?”

“It does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young: she has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year,
nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. She has been doing
everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it?--susceptibility to her feelings; which
are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every
charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.”

“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so ill of
Wickham, as to believe him capable of the attempt.”

“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”

“And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.

“I do, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you the other day
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with
such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From
what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
her.”

“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?”

“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight’s time. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it
apparently be to anyone, that the good opinion, which all the
neighbourhood had of him, should then be overthrown? And even when it
was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of
opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could
be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a
consequence as _this_ should ensue, you may easily believe was far
enough from my thoughts.”

“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”

“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for
the first two months: but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could
find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.

They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on
the road, reached Longbourn by dinnertime the next day. It was a comfort
to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long
expectations.

The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.

Elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running downstairs from
her mother’s apartment, immediately met her.

Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.

“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
everything will be well.”

“Is my father in town?”

“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”

“And have you heard from him often?”

“We have heard only once. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him to do. He merely added, that he should not write
again, till he had something of importance to mention.”

“And my mother--how is she? How are you all?”

“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. She is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven! are quite well.”

“But you--how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much you
must have gone through!”

Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of
the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.

When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good,
however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
errors of her daughter must be principally owing.

“If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened: but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had
been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have
the charge of her; but I was over-ruled, as I always am. Poor, dear
child! And now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight
Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is
to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out, before he is cold
in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what
we shall do.”

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.
Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.

“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he: “though it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more, we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him
come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.”

“Oh, my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. And, above all things, keep Mr. Bennet from
fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in--that I am frightened
out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings all over me,
such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at my
heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear
Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me,
for she does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how
kind you are! I know you will contrive it all.”

But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in
her hopes as her fears; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings on the
housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
subject.

In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more
of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table,--

“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”

Then perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson:--that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one
false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”

Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to
make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.

In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an
hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the
opportunity of making any inquiries which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I
have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? They must have seen them together for ever.”

“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so
grieved for him. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened his journey.”

“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”

“Yes; but when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of
their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from _that_ I am
inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.”

“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”

“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a
little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in
marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other many weeks.”

“But not before they went to Brighton?”

“No, I believe not.”

“And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself? Does he
know his real character?”

“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant; and since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt:
but I hope this may be false.”

“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,
this could not have happened!”

“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister.

“But to expose the former faults of any person, without knowing what
their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable.”

“We acted with the best intentions.”

“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to his
wife?”

“He brought it with him for us to see.”

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
were the contents:--

     /* NIND “My dear Harriet, */

     “You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
     laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
     missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
     who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the
     world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without
     him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at
     Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the
     surprise the greater when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia
     Wickham. What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for
     laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my
     engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will
     excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at
     the next ball we meet with great pleasure. I shall send for my
     clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to
     mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed
     up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will
     drink to our good journey.

“Your affectionate friend,

“LYDIA BENNET.”


“Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had
finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But
at least it shows that _she_ was serious in the object of her journey.
Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a
_scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”

“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!”

“Oh, Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”

“I do not know: I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics; and though I endeavoured to
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much
as I might have done. But the horror of what might possibly happen
almost took from me my faculties.”

“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look
well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone.”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it right for either of them.
Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much that her hours of
repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Philips came to Longbourn on
Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and Lady
Lucas has been very kind: she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if
they could be of use to us.”

“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth: “perhaps she
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too
little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence,
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.

“He meant, I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be
remarked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this.”




[Illustration:

     The Post
]




CHAPTER XLVIII.


[Illustration]

The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
They were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn as soon as he could, to
the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
security for her husband’s not being killed in a duel.

Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to
her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity,
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman’s family.
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and
everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of
her sister’s ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still
less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now
come, when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before
entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some
news of them.

Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, his wife received a
letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street.
That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added, that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London, and
promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this
effect:--

“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself. If there
were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such
a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in
his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any
other person.”

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for
her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any
information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved.

She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father
and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible,
however, that some of his companions in the ----shire might be able to
give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting
it, the application was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters was
the first grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as
follows:--

     /* “My dear Sir, */

     “I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
     in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
     suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter
     from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and
     myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable
     family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest
     kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No
     arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe
     a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that
     must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The
     death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of
     this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to
     suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness
     of behaviour in your

     [Illustration:

“To whom I have related the affair”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though,
     at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet,
     I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally
     bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an
     age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in
     which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by
     Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair.
     They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one
     daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for
     who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect
     themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me,
     moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain
     event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been
     involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you, then,
     my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off
     your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to
     reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.

“I am, dear sir,” etc., etc.

Mr. Gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
It was not known that Wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up
any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His
former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the
militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship
with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out
as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own
finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to
his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations; for it had just transpired
that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount.
Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be
necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. He owed a good deal in the
town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner
did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family;
Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly
unexpected; I had not an idea of it.”

Mr. Gardiner added, in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to
his brother-in-law’s entreaty that he would return to his family and
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering
what her anxiety for his life had been before.

“What! is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?”

As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she
and her children should go to London at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.

Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world.
His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of
their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing.
Elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from
Pemberley.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_,--though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two.

When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away; and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it.”

“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.

“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to
fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough.”

“Do you suppose them to be in London?”

“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”

“And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty.

“She is happy, then,” said her father, drily; “and her residence there
will probably be of some duration.”

Then, after a short silence, he continued, “Lizzy, I bear you no
ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which,
considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.”

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s
tea.

“This is a parade,” cried he, “which does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can,--or perhaps I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”

“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty, fretfully. “If _I_
should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.”

“_You_ go to Brighton! I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne,
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at least learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter my house
again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely
prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And you are
never to stir out of doors, till you can prove that you have spent ten
minutes of every day in a rational manner.”

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.

“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XLIX.


[Illustration]

Two days after Mr. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”

“What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”

“Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here
this half hour, and master has had a letter.”

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said,--

“If you are looking for my master, ma’am, he is walking towards the
little copse.”

Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more,
and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,
came up with him, and eagerly cried out,--

“Oh, papa, what news? what news? have you heard from my uncle?”

“Yes, I have had a letter from him by express.”

“Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?”

“What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the letter from
his pocket; “but perhaps you would like to read it.”

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is
about.”

     /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Monday, August 2_. */

“My dear Brother,

     “At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
     as, upon the whole, I hope will give you satisfaction. Soon after
     you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what
     part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet.
     It is enough to know they are discovered: I have seen them
     both----”

     [Illustration:

“But perhaps you would like to read it”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     “Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane: “they are married!”

     Elizabeth read on: “I have seen them both. They are not married,
     nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are
     willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on
     your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is
     required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her
     equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your
     children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
     moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your
     life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which,
     considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as
     far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by
     express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You
     will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham’s
     circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to
     be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to
     say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are
     discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune.
     If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act
     in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will
     immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper
     settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming
     to town again; therefore stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on
     my diligence and care. Send back your answer as soon as you can,
     and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my
     niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will
     approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as
     anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.

“EDW. GARDINER.”

“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be
possible that he will marry her?”

“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him,” said her
sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”

“And have you answered the letter?” said Elizabeth.

“No; but it must be done soon.”

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he
wrote.

“Oh! my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”

“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
yourself.”

“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.”

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

“And--may I ask?” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with.”

“Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”

“And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man.”

“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there
are two things that I want very much to know:--one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am ever
to pay him.”

“Money! my uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”

“I mean that no man in his proper senses would marry Lydia on so slight
a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.”

“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh,
it must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has
distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.”

“No,” said her father. “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a farthing
less than ten thousand pounds: I should be sorry to think so ill of him,
in the very beginning of our relationship.”

“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
repaid?”

Mr. Bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. “How strange this is! and for _this_ we are to be
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Oh, Lydia!”

“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would
not marry Lydia, if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children
of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand
pounds?”

“If we are ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said
Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she
first sees my aunt!”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said
Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry
her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.”

“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you, nor
I, nor anybody, can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.”

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
it known to her. He was writing, and, without raising his head, coolly
replied,--

“Just as you please.”

“May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her?”

“Take whatever you like, and get away.”

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married,
her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter
would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried: “this is delightful indeed! She will
be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My
good, kind brother! I knew how it would be--I knew he would manage
everything. How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how
much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under.

“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great
measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to
assist Mr. Wickham with money.”

“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him except a few presents. Well! I am so happy.
In a short time, I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well
it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you
write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.

“I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on
Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An
airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! here comes Hill. My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”

Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Poor Lydia’s
situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she
had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward,
neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly
expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only
two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.




[Illustration:

“The spiteful old ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER L.


[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet had very often wished, before this period of his life, that,
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of
honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to
be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law; and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless; for, of course, they were to have a son. This son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
Bennet, for many years after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too
late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy; and her
husband’s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though
expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within
that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have
as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon
despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in
its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother; but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her.

The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of
conversation, had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world in some distant
farm-house. But there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the
good-natured wishes for her well-doing, which had proceeded before from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton, lost but little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such a husband her misery
was considered certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of
her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.

“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings would quit it, or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off. I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her, “Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the
imprudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm: it
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege, without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she could believe
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace, which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place.

Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther, through his means. There were
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;
but at the same time there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s
frailty would have mortified her so much. Not, however, from any fear of
disadvantage from it individually to herself; for at any rate there
seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia’s marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other
objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest
kind with the man whom he so justly scorned.

From such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink. The
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she
hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now
have been gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex. But while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;
and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must
have received benefit of greater importance.

But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence she
could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to
a couple who were only brought together because their passions were
stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet’s
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them, that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.

“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as his
marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his
account and my niece’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intention to go into the
Regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are
able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General----’s regiment, now quartered in the north. It is
an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham
in and near Brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have
pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list, according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I
hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and
all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
Gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the south. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.

“E. GARDINER.”

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s
removal from the ----shire, as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But
Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in
the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her
company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites.

“She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite shocking
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General----’s
regiment.”

His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north,
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,
urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to
the north. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he
sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon
as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth
was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme;
and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him
would have been the last object of her wishes.




[Illustration:

“With an affectionate smile”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LI.


[Illustration]

Their sister’s wedding-day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to meet
them at----, and they were to return in it by dinnertime. Their arrival
was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets--and Jane more especially, who
gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had _she_
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
must endure.

They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast-room to receive
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy.

Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to
Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy, with an
alacrity which showed no doubt of their happiness.

Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him.

Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was
Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned
from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at
length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of
some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a
great while since she had been there.

Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners
were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth
had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat
down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the
impudence of an impudent man. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the
cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
colour.

There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good-humoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for
the world.

“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away:
it seems but a fortnight, I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.”

Her father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed, Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,--

“Oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was
afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle,
so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass
next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the
window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and
smiled like anything.”

Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining-parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to
her eldest sister,--

“Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a
married woman.”

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all
their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by
each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring
and boast of being married to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the
breakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a
charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they
may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the
place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!”

“Very true; and if I had my will we should. But, my dear Lydia, I don’t
at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”

“Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things.
You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at
Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I
will take care to get good partners for them all.”

“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.

“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over.”

“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think than such as did not.

Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to
find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. She had scarcely needed her
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did
everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds
on the first of September than anybody else in the country.

One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth,--

“Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You were
not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?”

“No, really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little
said on the subject.”

“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were
married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o’clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church.

“Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid,
you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should
have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was
dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a
sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was
thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether
he would be married in his blue coat.

“Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual: I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you’ll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything! To be sure, London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open.

“Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was
called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you
know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so
frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away;
and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day. But,
luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set
out. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he _had_ been prevented
going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as
well.”

“Mr. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

“Oh, yes! he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But, gracious me!
I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”

“If it was to be a secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”

“Oh, certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we will
ask you no questions.”

“Thank you,” said Lydia; “for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be so angry.”

On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her
power, by running away.

But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it
was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her
sister’s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended.

“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to
know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively
speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to
think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance.”

“Not that I _shall_, though,” she added to herself, and she finished the
letter; “and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.”

Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of
it:--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.




[Illustration:

“I am sure she did not listen.”
]




CHAPTER LII.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it, than
hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
contain a denial.

     /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Sept. 6_. */

“My dear Niece,

     “I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
     morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will
     not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself
     surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_.
     Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know,
     that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on _your_
     side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
     impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am; and nothing
     but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed
     him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and
     ignorant, I must be more explicit. On the very day of my coming
     home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr.
     Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all
     over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked
     as _yours_ seems to have been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he
     had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he
     had seen and talked with them both--Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once.
     From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after
     ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
     them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
     himself that Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known as
     to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or
     confide in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken
     pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to
     lay his private actions open to the world. His character was to
     speak for itself. He called it, therefore, his duty to step
     forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on
     by himself. If he _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never
     disgrace him. He had been some days in town before he was able to
     discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was
     more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this was another
     reason for his resolving to follow us. There is a lady, it seems, a
     Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
     dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though
     he did not say what. She then took a large house in Edward Street,
     and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs.
     Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he
     went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to town. But
     it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
     wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery
     and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be
     found. Wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in
     London; and had she been able to receive them into her house, they
     would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our
     kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in ----
     Street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia.
     His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade
     her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
     friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her,
     offering his assistance as far as it would go. But he found Lydia
     absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none
     of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of
     leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or
     other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her
     feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a
     marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he
     easily learnt had never been _his_ design. He confessed himself
     obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts of honour
     which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill
     consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own folly alone. He meant to
     resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation,
     he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but
     he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live
     on. Mr. Darcy asked why he did not marry your sister at once.
     Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
     been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been
     benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question,
     that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making
     his fortune by marriage, in some other country. Under such
     circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the
     temptation of immediate relief. They met several times, for there
     was much to be discussed. Wickham, of course, wanted more than he
     could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. Everything
     being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy’s next step was to make
     your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch
     Street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not
     be seen; and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father
     was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did
     not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly
     consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him
     till after the departure of the former. He did not leave his name,
     and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called
     on business. On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your
     uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk
     together. They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It
     was not all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express
     was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I
     fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character,
     after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times;
     but _this_ is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not
     do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked,
     therefore say nothing about it) your uncle would most readily have
     settled the whole. They battled it together for a long time, which
     was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it
     deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead
     of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up
     with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely
     against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning
     gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that
     would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
     it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no further than yourself, or
     Jane at most. You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done
     for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I
     believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another
     thousand in addition to her own settled upon _her_, and his
     commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him
     alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his
     reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character
     had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been
     received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in
     _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody’s_
     reserve can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this
     fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that
     your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit
     for _another interest_ in the affair. When all this was resolved
     on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at
     Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more
     when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to
     receive the last finish. I believe I have now told you everything.
     It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I
     hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to
     us, and Wickham had constant admission to the house. _He_ was
     exactly what he had been when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I
     would not tell you how little I was satisfied with _her_ behaviour
     while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter
     last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a
     piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no
     fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner,
     representing to her the wickedness of what she had done, and all
     the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it
     was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes
     quite provoked; but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane,
     and for their sakes had patience with her. Mr. Darcy was punctual
     in his return, and, as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He
     dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on
     Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear
     Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
     enough to say before) how much I like him? His behaviour to us has,
     in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire.
     His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but
     a little more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his
     wife may teach him. I thought him very sly; he hardly ever
     mentioned your name. But slyness seems the fashion. Pray forgive
     me, if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so
     far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I
     have been all round the park. A low phaeton with a nice little pair
     of ponies would be the very thing. But I must write no more. The
     children have been wanting me this half hour.

“Yours, very sincerely,

“M. GARDINER.”


The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced, of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her
sister’s match--which she had feared to encourage, as an exertion of
goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be
just, from the pain of obligation--were proved beyond their greatest
extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken
on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a
research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he
must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently
meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe the man whom he always
most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to
pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard
nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it
was a hope shortly checked by other considerations; and she soon felt
that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his
affection for her, for a woman who had already refused him, as able to
overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with
Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from
the connection. He had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think
how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no
extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel
he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising
it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement,
she could perhaps believe, that remaining partiality for her might
assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be
materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that
they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a
return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, everything to
him. Oh, how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she
had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards
him! For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him,--proud that
in a cause of compassion and honour he had been able to get the better
of himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and
again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible
of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly
both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence
subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.

She was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someone’s approach;
and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by
Wickham.

“I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?” said he,
as he joined her.

“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome.”

“I should be sorry, indeed, if it were. _We_ were always good friends,
and now we are better.”

“True. Are the others coming out?”

“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley.”

She replied in the affirmative.

“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of
me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”

“Yes, she did.”

“And what did she say?”

“That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented.”

“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said,--

“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”

“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said
Elizabeth. “It must be something particular to take him there at this
time of year.”

“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had.”

“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”

“And do you like her?”

“Very much.”

“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year
or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad
you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.”

“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”

“Did you go by the village of Kympton?”

“I do not recollect that we did.”

“I mention it because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most
delightful place! Excellent parsonage-house! It would have suited me in
every respect.”

“How should you have liked making sermons?”

“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and
the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine; but,
to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the
retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of
happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance when you were in Kent?”

“I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”

“You have! Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember.”

“I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-making was not so
palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.”

“You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.”

They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him,
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,--

“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us
quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.”

She held out her hand: he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.




[Illustration:

“Mr. Darcy with him.”
]




CHAPTER LIII.


[Illustration]

Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
had said enough to keep him quiet.

The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came; and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.

“Oh, my dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?”

“Oh, Lord! I don’t know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”

“Write to me very often, my dear.”

“As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for
writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have nothing else to
do.”

Mr. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s. He
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

“He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us
all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”

The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.

“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one’s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”

“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter,” said
Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single.”

“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married;
but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so far off. If
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”

But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and
smiled, and shook her head, by turns.

“Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Mrs.
Philips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not that
I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I
never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to
Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen? But that
is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention
a word about it. And so, it is quite certain he is coming?”

“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nichols was in
Meryton last night: I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. He
comes down on Thursday, at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was
going to the butcher’s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.”

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said,--

“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed; but don’t imagine it was from
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people’s remarks.”

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come
without it.

“Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot come
to a house, which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.”

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them.

The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

“As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “you
will wait on him, of course.”

“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield.

“’Tis an _etiquette_ I despise,” said he. “If he wants our society, let
him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend _my_ hours in
running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again.”

“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait
on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
him.”

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--

“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference; but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she
says. Happy shall I be when his stay at Netherfield is over!”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth; “but it
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have
always so much.”

Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could. She counted the days
that must intervene before their invitation could be sent--hopeless of
seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in
Hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressing-room window enter the
paddock, and ride towards the house.

Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by her sister.

“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it be?”

“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know.”

“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. Mr. what’s his name--that tall, proud man.”

“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of
Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of him.”

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Mrs.
Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards
him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as
what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered
behaviour in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure.

“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early
enough for expectation.”

She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her
sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance.

Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as usual; and,
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps, he could not in her
mother’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a
painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her courtesy and address of his friend.

Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the
preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was
hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied.

Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did--a question
which she could not answer without confusion--said scarcely anything. He
was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends
when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed, without
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry
with herself for being so.

“Could I expect it to be otherwise?” said she. “Yet why did he come?”

She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to
him she had hardly courage to speak.

She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.

“It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs. Bennet.

He readily agreed to it.

“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say,
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled: and one of my
own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers. It was in the ‘Times’ and the ‘Courier,’ I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately,
George Wickham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up, too, and I wonder how he came
to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
not tell.

“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,”
continued her mother; “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
hard to have her taken away from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, a
place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, I do not
know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of
his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the Regulars.
Thank heaven! he has _some_ friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he
deserves.”

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery
of shame that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however,
the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done
before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the
country at present. A few weeks, he believed.

“When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her mother,
“I beg you will come here and shoot as many as you please on Mr.
Bennet’s manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the coveys for you.”

Elizabeth’s misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had
flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant she felt,
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for
moments of such painful confusion.

“The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be
in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either
one or the other again!”

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former
lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every
five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her
as handsome as she had been last year; as good-natured, and as
unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent.

When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days’ time.

“You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,” she added; “for when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you
I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your
engagement.”

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.

Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
of one who had ten thousand a year.




[Illustration:

     “Jane happened to look round”
]




CHAPTER LIV.


[Illustration]

As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or, in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects
which must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed
her.

“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she,
“did he come at all?”

She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

“He could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle and aunt, when he
was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he
no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing man! I will think
no more about him.”

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her
better satisfied with their visitors than Elizabeth.

“Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly
seen, that on both sides we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance.”

“Yes, very indifferent, indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh, Jane!
take care.”

“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak as to be in danger now.”

“I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with
you as ever.”

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the
good-humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit,
had revived.

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as
sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to
invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided. He placed himself by her.

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He
bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind;
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell
him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
the family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation,
than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and
uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room before the gentlemen
came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil.
She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her
chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

“If he does not come to me, _then_,” said she, “I shall give him up for
ever.”

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,--

“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
do we?”

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough
to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for
being so silly!

“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.”

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee-cup
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,--

“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

“Yes; she will remain there till Christmas.”

“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”

“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough
these three weeks.”

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse
with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies
all rose; and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when
all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

“Well, girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “what
say you to the day? I think everything has passed off uncommonly well, I
assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat
a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases’ last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
what do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her
at Netherfield at last!’ She did, indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as
good a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved
girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”

[Illustration:

     “M^{rs}. Long and her nieces.”
]

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of
Bingley’s behaviour to Jane to be convinced that she would get him at
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.

“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
may often meet again.”

Elizabeth smiled.

“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I
assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it. I am
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing, than any other man.”

“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment.”

“How hard it is in some cases to be believed! And how impossible in
others! But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?”

“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_ your
confidante.”




[Illustration:

     “Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you.”
]




CHAPTER LV.


[Illustration]

A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days’ time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.

“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.; and if she
would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on
them.

“Can you come to-morrow?”

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughters’ room, in her
dressing-gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,--

“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is
come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss
Lizzy’s hair.”

“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come, be quick, be quick!
where is your sash, my dear?”

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went upstairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter, mamma? What do
you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”

“Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,--

“Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room.
Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such
premeditation, and her entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a
few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,--

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

Elizabeth was forced to go.

“We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother as
soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in
my dressing-room.”

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her
daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a
forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the
daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away
an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet’s
means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the
happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman’s
concurrence.

Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the
morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more
agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet’s invention was again at work to get
everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to
write, went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea; for
as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

But on her returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished,
she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her
mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she
perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as
if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion,
the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each
other, would have told it all. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but
_hers_ she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by
either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when
Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and,
whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

“’Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh,
why is not everybody as happy?”

Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a
delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said, for the present.

“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh, Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness?”

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
card-party, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation.

“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious
circumspection! of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!”

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her
father had been short and to the purpose.

“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.

“With my mother upstairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”

He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her
delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent, or
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how really happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
turned to his daughter and said,--

“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.

“You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income.”

“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonable in _me_.”

“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely
more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together. Oh, he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!”

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her
favourite child. At that moment she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.

Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought
himself obliged to accept.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for
while he was present Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else: but
she found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those hours of
separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he always
attached himself to Elizabeth for the pleasure of talking of her; and
when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of relief.

“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me that he
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed
it possible.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account for
it?”

“It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we
can never be what we once were to each other.”

“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.”

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November he
really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being indifferent
would have prevented his coming down again?”

“He made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.”

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
the little value he put on his own good qualities.

Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference
of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving
heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice
her against him.

“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
Jane. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all? If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such
another man for you!”

“If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you.
Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and
she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.

The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world; though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER LVI.


[Illustration]

One morning, about a week after Bingley’s engagement with Jane had been
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the
lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors; and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off; and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open, and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised: but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name to her mother on her Ladyship’s entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.

Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth,--

“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother?”

Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

“And _that_, I suppose, is one of your sisters?”

“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine.
“She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man,
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”

“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine, after a
short silence.

“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my Lady, I dare say; but, I
assure you, it is much larger than Sir William Lucas’s.”

“This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room for the evening in
summer: the windows are full west.”

Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then
added,--

“May I take the liberty of asking your Ladyship whether you left Mr. and
Mrs. Collins well?”

“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her Ladyship to take some
refreshment: but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,--

“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company.”

“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her Ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”

Elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
decent-looking rooms, walked on.

Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable.

[Illustration:

“After a short survey”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she looked in
her face.

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come.”

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

“Indeed, you are mistaken, madam; I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here.”

“Miss Bennet,” replied her Ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought to
know that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most
alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told, that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
_you_--that Miss Elizabeth Bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew--my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on
setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you.”

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. What could your Ladyship propose by it?”

“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.”

“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth
coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it--if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.”

“If! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?”

“I never heard that it was.”

“And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for it?”

“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your Ladyship. _You_
may ask questions which _I_ shall not choose to answer.”

“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”

“Your Ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”

“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
may have drawn him in.”

“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”

“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”

“But you are not entitled to know _mine_; nor will such behaviour as
this ever induce me to be explicit.”

“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to _my daughter_. Now, what have you to say?”

“Only this,--that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will
make an offer to me.”

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,--

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles we planned the
union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be
accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family? Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends--to his
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say, that from his
earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”

“Yes; and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no
other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”

“Because honour, decorum, prudence--nay, interest--forbid it. Yes, Miss
Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us.”

“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of Mr.
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine.”

“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that
score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I
be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person’s
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.”

“_That_ will make your Ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on _me_.”

“I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide
them?--the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family,
connections, or fortune! Is this to be endured? But it must not, shall
not be! If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to
quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman’s daughter; so far we are
equal.”

“True. You _are_ a gentleman’s daughter. But what was your mother? Who
are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition.”

“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.”

“Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?”

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
moment’s deliberation,--

“I am not.”

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

“And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?”

“I will make no promise of the kind.”

“Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I
will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.”

“And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make
_their_ marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to
me, would _my_ refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on
his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my
character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these.
How far your nephew might approve of your interference in _his_ affairs,
I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in
mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the
subject.”

“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged I have still another to add. I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man’s marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncle. And is
_such_ a girl to be my nephew’s sister? Is _her_ husband, who is the son
of his late father’s steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of
what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”

“You can _now_ have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered.
“You have insulted me, in every possible method. I must beg to return to
the house.”

And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back. Her Ladyship was highly incensed.

“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”

“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.”

“You are then resolved to have him?”

“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”

“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”

“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “has any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment’s
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.”

“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I
shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you
reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.”

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added,--

“I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your
mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
Ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of her dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

“She did not choose it,” said her daughter; “she would go.”

“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well.
She is on her road somewhere, I dare say; and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”

Elizabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.




[Illustration:

     “But now it comes out”
]




CHAPTER LVII.


[Illustration]

The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into could not be easily overcome; nor could she for many
hours learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at
Lucas Lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine,) had
only set _that_ down as almost certain and immediate which _she_ had
looked forward to as possible at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent the marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an
application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her Ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would
address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.

If he had been wavering before, as to what he should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.

“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to understand
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
at all.”

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet’s curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you: come into my room.”

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell
her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it might
be from Lady Catherine, and she anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations.

She followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down. He
then said,--

“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. I did not know before that I had _two_ daughters on the brink
of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself, when her father continued,--

“You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity to discover the
name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.”

“From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?”

“Something very much to the purpose, of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says
on that point. What relates to yourself is as follows:--‘Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another,
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate
may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages
in this land.’ Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?
‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the
heart of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and
extensive patronage. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn
my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a
precipitate closure with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course,
you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’ Have you any idea,
Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out. ‘My motive for
cautioning you is as follows:--We have reason to imagine that his aunt,
Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly
eye.’ _Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more
effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in
his life! It is admirable!”

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to her.

“Are you not diverted?”

“Oh, yes. Pray read on.”

“‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her Ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that, on the score of
some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give
her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my
duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she
and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Mr.
Collins, moreover, adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia’s sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as
a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ _That_ is his notion of
Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear
Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But,
Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be
_missish_, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For
what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them
in our turn?”

“Oh,” cried Elizabeth, “I am exceedingly diverted. But it is so
strange!”

“Yes, _that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference and _your_
pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins’s correspondence for any
consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his
repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her by
what he said of Mr. Darcy’s indifference; and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of
his seeing too _little_, she might have fancied too _much_.




[Illustration:

“The efforts of his aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LVIII.


[Illustration]

Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine’s
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to
tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in
momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was
too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases’, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the
moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was
high, she immediately said,--

“Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature, and for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings care not how much I may be wounding yours. I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor
sister. Ever since I have known it I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest
of my family I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner
was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.”

“If you _will_ thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of _you_.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause,
her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_
affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The
happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the
expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but
though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of feelings
which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection
every moment more valuable.

They walked on without knowing in what direction. There was too much to
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who _did_ call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter, which, in her Ladyship’s apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from
her nephew which _she_ had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
Ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.

“It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine frankly and openly.”

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know enough of
my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations.”

“What did you say of me that I did not deserve? For though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour
to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if strictly
examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, I hope,
improved in civility.”

“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: ‘Had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.’ Those were your words. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I
confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”

“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way.”

“I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way that would induce you to accept me.”

“Oh, do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at
all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.”

Darcy mentioned his letter. “Did it,” said he,--“did it _soon_ make you
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?”

She explained what its effects on her had been, and how gradually all
her former prejudices had been removed.

“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part,
especially the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power
of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly
make you hate me.”

“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.”

“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself perfectly
calm and cool; but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.”

“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings
of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance
attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my
philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.”

“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. _Your_
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
ignorance. But with _me_, it is not so. Painful recollections will
intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled. I have been a
selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a
child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to correct my
temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride
and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only _child_),
I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father
particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged,
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond
my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to
_wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with
my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-twenty; and such I might
still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not
owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a
doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”

“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”

“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses.”

“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure
you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me
wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening!”

“Hate you! I was angry, perhaps, at first, but my anger soon began to
take a proper direction.”

“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me when we met at
Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”

“No, indeed, I felt nothing but surprise.”

“Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.”

“My object _then_,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every civility
in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped
to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves, I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half
an hour after I had seen you.”

He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her acquaintance, and of her
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.

She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each to be dwelt on farther.

After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home.

“What could have become of Mr. Bingley and Jane?” was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
it.

“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case.

“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told
him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.

“Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you told him
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?”

“From the former. I had narrowly observed her, during the two visits
which I had lately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection.”

“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
him.”

“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made everything easy. I was obliged to confess one
thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now.”

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and
it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of
Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.




[Illustration:

     “Unable to utter a syllable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LIX.


[Illustration]

“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and
from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in
reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond her own
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed; the unacknowledged were silent.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in
the family when her situation became known: she was aware that no one
liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
_dislike_ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! Engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no,
you shall not deceive me: I know it to be impossible.”

“This is a wretched beginning, indeed! My sole dependence was on you;
and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I
am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we
are engaged.”

Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much
you dislike him.”

“You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
did not always love him so well as I do now; but in such cases as these
a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself.”

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously, assured her of its truth.

“Good heaven! can it be really so? Yet now I must believe you,” cried
Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you
certain--forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with him?”

“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already that we
are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane?
Shall you like to have such a brother?”

“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than
marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?”

“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do when I
tell you all.”

“What do you mean?”

“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry.”

“My dearest sister, now be, _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously.
Let me know everything that I am to know without delay. Will you tell me
how long you have loved him?”

“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began;
but I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds
at Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.

“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I
always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I
must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But,
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know
of it to another, not to you.”

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to
mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer
conceal from her his share in Lydia’s marriage. All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation.

“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s
way.”

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”

“I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
never seen the view.”

“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?”

Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great
curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
consented. As she went upstairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her,
saying,--

“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself; but I hope you will not mind it. It is
all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
him except just now and then; so do not put yourself to inconvenience.”

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet’s consent should be
asked in the course of the evening: Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
disapprobation.

In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to
be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that _she_,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, “Go to your father; he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
“Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
But will they make you happy?”

“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my
indifference?”

“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked him.”

“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes; “I love him.
Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
such terms.”

“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he
condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about.”

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and, at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her
estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that
his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months’ suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities,
she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the
match.

“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.

“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did everything;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble
and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and _would_ have
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow, he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading
Mr. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Everything was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.

When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;
for, on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to
utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could
comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what
was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would
have thought it? And is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how rich
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my
dear Lizzy! pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before. I
hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Everything
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,
Lord! what will become of me? I shall go distracted.”

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,
her mother followed her.

“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else. Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a lord! And a
special licence--you must and shall be married by a special licence.
But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond
of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations’
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she ventured not to speak
to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark
her deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
every hour in his esteem.

“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane’s.”




[Illustration:

“The obsequious civility.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LX.


[Illustration]

Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could
you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?”

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun.”

“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be
sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

“For the liveliness of your mind I did.”

“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it;
and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. To be sure you know no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love.”

“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was
ill at Netherfield?”

“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last? What made you so shy of me, when you
first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you
called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”

“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”

“But I was embarrassed.”

“And so was I.”

“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”

“A man who had felt less might.”

“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken if I had not asked you! My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too
much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject? This will never do.”

“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
Catherine’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to
wait for an opening of yours. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope,
and I was determined at once to know everything.”

“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequences?”

“My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and
if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”

“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
befall her?”

“I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to
be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done
directly.”

“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had been overrated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner’s
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:--

“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the
truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy,
indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly
err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more
than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to
the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the
ponies is delightful. We will go round the park every day. I am the
happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but no one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours,” etc.

Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return
for his last.

     /* “Dear Sir, */

     “I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
     soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as
     you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
     more to give.

“Yours sincerely,” etc.

Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his approaching
marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to
Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
kinder answer than she knew was deserved.

The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was
as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so
exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew’s letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. James’s, with very decent composure. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s
good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be
vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at
all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to
shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to
keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might
converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its
pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward
with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so
little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their
family party at Pemberley.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER LXI.


[Illustration]

Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she
afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be
guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps,
it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous
and invariably silly.

Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his
sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally
known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia’s example, she
became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s
society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet’s being quite
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
much reluctance.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of
everything, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be
prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which
Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by
his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The
letter was to this effect:--

     /* “My dear Lizzy, */

     “I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half so well as I do my dear
     Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you
     so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
     think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very
     much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live
     upon without some help. Any place would do of about three or four
     hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it,
     if you had rather not.

“Yours,” etc.

As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards
discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a
cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection
for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and,
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her. Though Darcy could never
receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth’s sake, he assisted him
further in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when
her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the
Bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even
Bingley’s good-humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_
of giving them a hint to be gone.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.

Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each
other, even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an
astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in
her way. By Elizabeth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion,
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on
them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.

With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy,
as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.

                            [Illustration:

                                  THE
                                  END
                                   ]
                     THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE TRAIN

                          By AGATHA CHRISTIE

            Copyright, 1928, by Dodd, Mead & Company, Inc.

                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                            _Dedicated to_

                       TWO DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS
                            OF THE O. F. D.

                         CARLOTTA _and_ PETER




                               Contents


                  1. The Man with the White Hair

                  2. M. le Marquis

                  3. Heart of Fire

                  4. In Curzon Street

                  5. A Useful Gentleman

                  6. Mirelle

                  7. Letters

                  8. Lady Tamplin Writes a Letter

                  9. An Offer Refused

                 10. On the Blue Train

                 11. Murder

                 12. At the Villa Marguerite

                 13. Van Aldin Gets a Telegram

                 14. Ada Mason's Story

                 15. The Comte de la Roche

                 16. Poirot Discusses the Case

                 17. An Aristocratic Gentleman

                 18. Derek Lunches

                 19. An Unexpected Visitor

                 20. Katherine Makes a Friend

                 21. At the Tennis

                 22. M. Papopolous Breakfasts

                 23. A New Theory

                 24. Poirot Gives Advice

                 25. Defiance

                 26. A Warning

                 27. Interview with Mirelle

                 28. Poirot Plays the Squirrel

                 29. A Letter From Home

                 30. Miss Viner Gives Judgment

                 31. Mr. Aarons Lunches

                 32. Katherine and Poirot Compare Notes

                 33. A New Theory

                 34. The Blue Train Again

                 35. Explanations

                 36. By the Sea




                          Cast of Characters


MONSIEUR LE MARQUIS, an elegant gentleman who merits his mask but not
his white hairs

DEMETRIUS PAPOPOLOUS, a venerable dealer in unique antiques

ZIA PAPOPOLOUS, whose resemblance to her father, Demetrius, is more
than physical

RUFUS VAN ALDIN, a hard man, with plenty of hard cash

MAJOR RICHARD KNIGHTON, Van Aldin's secretary--quick, intelligent, and
resourceful

RUTH KETTERING, another daughter who resembles her father, Rufus Van
Aldin

DEREK KETTERING, Ruth's husband, the future Lord Leconbury

MIRELLE, an exotic dancer who was not made to be poor

KATHERINE GREY, a grey-eyed saint with a sense of humor--and a
brand-new fortune

VISCOUNTESS ROSALIE TAMPLIN, who has an eye (blue and charming) for a
quick penny

THE HONORABLE LENOX TAMPLIN, who does _not_ resemble her mother

M. HERCULE POIROT, the semiretired Belgian detective who is semimodest
about admitting that he is always right

ADA MASON, lady's maid to Ruth Kettering, and English to the tip of her
red nose

COMTE ARMAND DE LA ROCHE, a plausible scoundrel with a fatal
fascination for women




                     The Mystery of the Blue Train




                    1. The Man with the White Hair


It was close on midnight when a man crossed the Place de la Concorde.
In spite of the handsome fur coat which garbed his meagre form, there
was something essentially weak and paltry about him.

A little man with a face like a rat. A man, one would say, who could
never play a conspicuous part, or rise to prominence in any sphere.
And yet, in leaping to such a conclusion, an onlooker would have been
wrong. For this man, negligible and inconspicuous as he seemed, played
a prominent part in the destiny of the world. In an Empire where rats
ruled, he was the king of the rats.

Even now, an Embassy awaited his return. But he had business to do
first--business of which the Embassy was not officially cognizant. His
face gleamed white and sharp in the moonlight. There was the least
hint of a curve in the thin nose. His father had been a Polish Jew, a
journeyman tailor. It was business such as his father would have loved
that took him abroad to-night.

He came to the Seine, crossed it, and entered one of the less reputable
quarters of Paris. Here he stopped before a tall, dilapidated house
and made his way up to an apartment on the fourth floor. He had barely
time to knock before the door was opened by a woman who had evidently
been awaiting his arrival. She gave him no greeting, but helped him
off with his overcoat and then led the way into the tawdrily furnished
sitting-room. The electric light was shaded with dirty pink festoons
and it softened, but could not disguise, the girl's face with its mask
of crude paint. Could not disguise, either, the broad Mongolian cast of
her countenance. There was no doubt of Olga Demiroff's profession, nor
of her nationality.

"All is well, little one?"

"All is well, Boris Ivanovitch."

He nodded murmuring: "I do not think I have been followed."

But there was anxiety in his tone. He went to the window, drawing the
curtains aside slightly, and peering carefully out. He started away
violently.

"There are two men--on the opposite pavement. It looks to me--" He
broke off and began gnawing at his nails--a habit he had when anxious.

The Russian girl was shaking her head with a slow, reassuring action.

"They were here before you came."

"All the same, it looks to me as though they were watching this house."

"Possibly," she admitted indifferently.

"But then--"

"What of it? Even if they _know_--it will not be _you_ they will follow
from here."

A thin, cruel smile came to his lips.

"No," he admitted, "that is true."

He mused for a minute or two and then observed:

"This damned American--he can look after himself as well as anybody."

"I suppose so."

He went again to the window.

"Tough customers," he muttered, with a chuckle. "Known to the police, I
fear. Well, well, I wish Brother Apache good hunting."

Olga Demiroff shook her head.

"If the American is the kind of man they say he is, it will take more
than a couple of cowardly apaches to get the better of him." She
paused. "I wonder--"

"Well?"

"Nothing. Only twice this evening a man has passed along this street--a
man with white hair."

"What of it?"

"This. As he passed those two men, he dropped his glove. One of them
picked it up and returned it to him. A thread-bare device."

"You mean--that the white-haired man is--their employer?"

"Something of the kind."

The Russian looked alarmed and uneasy.

"You are sure--the parcel is safe? It has not been tampered with? There
has been too much talk ... much too much talk."

He gnawed his nails again.

"Judge for yourself."

She bent to the fireplace, deftly removing the coals. Underneath, from
amongst the crumpled balls of newspaper, she selected from the very
middle an oblong package wrapped round with grimy newspaper, and handed
it to the man.

"Ingenious," he said, with a nod of approval.

"The apartment has been searched twice. The mattress on my bed was
ripped open."

"It is as I said," he muttered. "There has been too much talk. This
haggling over the price--it was a mistake."

He had unwrapped the newspaper. Inside was a small brown paper parcel.
This in turn he unwrapped, verified the contents, and quickly wrapped
it up once more. As he did so, an electric bell rang sharply.

"The American is punctual," said Olga, with a glance at the clock.

She left the room. In a minute she returned ushering in a stranger, a
big, broad-shouldered man whose transatlantic origin was evident. His
keen glance went from one to the other.

"M. Krassnine?" he inquired politely.

"I am he," said Boris. "I must apologize for--for the unconventionality
of this meeting-place. But secrecy is urgent. I--I cannot afford to be
connected with this business in any way."

"Is that so?" said the American politely.

"I have your word, have I not, that no details of this transaction will
be made public? That is one of the conditions of--sale."

The American nodded.

"That has already been agreed upon," he said indifferently. "Now,
perhaps, you will produce the goods."

"You have the money--in notes?"

"Yes," replied the other.

He did not, however, make any attempt to produce it. After a moment's
hesitation, Krassnine gestured towards the small parcel on the table.

The American took it up and unrolled the wrapping paper. The contents
he took over to a small electric lamp and submitted them to a very
thorough examination. Satisfied, he drew from his pocket a thick
leather wallet and extracted from it a wad of notes. These he handed to
the Russian, who counted them carefully.

"All right?"

"I thank you, Monsieur. Everything is correct."

"Ah!" said the other. He slipped the brown paper parcel negligently
into his pocket. He bowed to Olga. "Good evening, Mademoiselle. Good
evening, M. Krassnine."

He went out shutting the door behind him. The eyes of the two in the
room met. The man passed his tongue over his dry lips.

"I wonder--will he ever get back to his hotel?" he muttered.

By common accord, they both turned to the window. They were just in
time to see the American emerge into the street below. He turned to the
left and marched along at a good pace without once turning his head.
Two shadows stole from a doorway and followed noiselessly. Pursuers and
pursued vanished into the night. Olga Demiroff spoke.

"He will get back safely," she said. "You need not fear--or
hope--whichever it is."

"Why do you think he will be safe?" asked Krassnine curiously.

"A man who has made as much money as he has could not possibly be a
fool," said Olga. "And talking of money--"

She looked significantly at Krassnine.

"Eh?"

"My share, Boris Ivanovitch."

With some reluctance, Krassnine handed over two of the notes. She
nodded her thanks, with a complete lack of emotion, and tucked them
away in her stocking.

"That is good," she remarked, with satisfaction.

He looked at her curiously.

"You have no regrets, Olga Vassilovna?"

"Regrets? For what?"

"For what has been in your keeping. There are women--most women, I
believe, who go mad over such things."

She nodded reflectively.

"Yes, you speak truth there. Most women have that madness. I--have not.
I wonder now--" She broke off.

"Well?" asked the other curiously.

"The American will be safe with them--yes, I am sure of that. But
afterwards--"

"Eh? What are you thinking of?"

"He will give them, of course, to some woman," said Olga thoughtfully.
"I wonder what will happen then...."

She shook herself impatiently and went over to the window. Suddenly
she uttered an exclamation and called to her companion.

"See, he is going down the street now--the man I mean."

They both gazed down together. A slim, elegant figure was progressing
along at a leisurely pace. He wore an opera hat and a cloak. As he
passed a street lamp, the light illumined a thatch of thick white hair.




                           2. M. le Marquis


The man with the white hair continued on his course, unhurried, and
seemingly indifferent to his surroundings. He took a side turning to
the right and another one to the left. Now and then he hummed a little
air to himself.

Suddenly he stopped dead and listened intently. He had heard a certain
sound. It might have been the bursting of a tyre or it might have
been--a shot. A curious smile played round his lips for a minute. Then
he resumed his leisurely walk.

On turning a corner he came upon a scene of some activity. A
representative of the law was making notes in a pocket-book, and one or
two late passers-by had collected on the spot. To one of these the man
with the white hair made a polite request for information.

"Something has been happening, yes?"

"_Mais oui_, Monsieur. Two apaches set upon an elderly American
gentleman."

"They did him no injury?"

"No, indeed." The man laughed. "The American, he had a revolver in his
pocket, and before they could attack him, he fired shots so closely
round them that they took alarm and fled. The police, as usual, arrived
too late."

"Ah!" said the inquirer.

He displayed no emotion of any kind.

Placidly and unconcernedly he resumed his nocturnal strolling.
Presently he crossed the Seine and came into the richer areas of the
city. It was some twenty minutes later that he came to a stop before a
certain house in a quiet but aristocratic thoroughfare.

The shop, for shop it was, was a restrained and unpretentious one. D.
Papopolous, dealer in antiques, was so known to fame that he needed
no advertisement, and indeed most of his business was not done over
a counter. M. Papopolous had a very handsome apartment of his own
overlooking the Champs Élysées, and it might reasonably be supposed
that he would have been found there and not at his place of business
at such an hour, but the man with the white hair seemed confident of
success as he pressed the obscurely placed bell, having first given a
quick glance up and down the deserted street.

His confidence was not misplaced. The door opened and a man stood in
the aperture. He wore gold rings in his ears and was of a swarthy cast
of countenance.

"Good evening," said the stranger. "Your master is within?"

"The master is here, but he does not see chance visitors at this time
of night," growled the other.

"I think he will see me. Tell him that his friend M. le Marquis is
here."

The man opened the door a little wider and allowed the visitor to enter.

The man who gave his name as M. le Marquis had shielded his face
with his hand as he spoke. When the man-servant returned with the
information that M. Papopolous would be pleased to receive the visitor
a further change had taken place in the stranger's appearance. The
man-servant must have been very unobservant or very well trained for
he betrayed no surprise at the small black satin mask which hid the
other's features. Leading the way to a door at the end of the hall, he
opened it and announced in a respectful murmur: "_M. le Marquis_."

The figure which rose to receive this strange guest was an imposing
one. There was something venerable and patriarchal about M. Papopolous.
He had a high domed forehead and a beautiful white beard. His manner
had in it something ecclesiastical and benign.

"My dear friend," said M. Papopolous.

He spoke in French and his tones were rich and unctuous.

"I must apologize," said the visitor, "for the lateness of the hour."

"Not at all. Not at all," said M. Papopolous--"an interesting time of
night. You have had, perhaps, an interesting evening?"

"Not personally," said M. le Marquis.

"Not personally," repeated M. Papopolous, "no, no, of course not. And
there is news, eh?"

He cast a sharp glance sideways at the other, a glance that was not
ecclesiastical or benign in the least.

"There is no news. The attempt failed. I hardly expected anything else."

"Quite so," said M. Papopolous; "anything crude--"

He waved his hand to express his intense distaste for crudity in any
form. There was indeed nothing crude about M. Papopolous nor about the
goods he handled. He was well known in most European courts, and kings
called him Demetrius in a friendly manner. He had the reputation for
the most exquisite discretion. That, together with the nobility of his
aspect, had carried him through several very questionable transactions.

"The direct attack--" said M. Papopolous. He shook his head. "It
answers sometimes--but very seldom."

The other shrugged his shoulders.

"It saves time," he remarked, "and to fail costs nothing--or next to
nothing. The other plan--will not fail."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, looking at him keenly.

The other nodded slowly.

"I have great confidence in your--er--reputation," said the antique
dealer.

M. le Marquis smiled gently.

"I think I may say," he murmured, "that your confidence will not be
misplaced."

"You have unique opportunities," said the other, with a note of envy in
his voice.

"I make them," said M. le Marquis.

He rose and took up the cloak which he had thrown carelessly on the
back of a chair.

"I will keep you informed, M. Papopolous, through the usual channels,
but there must be no hitch in your arrangements."

M. Papopolous was pained.

"There is _never_ a hitch in my arrangements," he complained.

The other smiled, and without any further word of adieu he left the
room, closing the door behind him.

M. Papopolous remained in thought for a moment stroking his venerable
white beard, and then moved across to a second door which opened
inwards. As he turned the handle, a young woman, who only too clearly
had been leaning against it with her ear to the keyhole, stumbled
headlong into the room. M. Papopolous displayed neither surprise nor
concern. It was evidently all quite natural to him.

"Well, Zia?" he asked.

"I did not hear him go," explained Zia.

She was a handsome young woman, built on Junoesque lines, with dark
flashing eyes and such a general air of resemblance to M. Papopolous
that it was easy to see they were father and daughter.

"It is annoying," she continued vexedly, "that one cannot see through a
keyhole and hear through it at the same time."

"It has often annoyed me," said M. Papopolous, with great simplicity.

"So that is M. le Marquis," said Zia slowly. "Does he always wear a
mask, father?"

"Always."

There was a pause.

"It is the rubies, I suppose?" asked Zia.

Her father nodded.

"What do you think, my little one?" he inquired, with a hint of
amusement in his beady black eyes.

"Of M. le Marquis?"

"Yes."

"I think," said Zia slowly, "that it is a very rare thing to find a
well-bred Englishman who speaks French as well as that."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, "so that is what you think."

As usual, he did not commit himself, but he regarded Zia with benign
approval.

"I thought, too," said Zia, "that his head was an odd shape."

"Massive," said her father--"a trifle massive. But then that effect is
always created by a wig."

They both looked at each other and smiled.




                           3. Heart of Fire


Rufus Van Aldin passed through the revolving doors of the Savoy, and
walked to the reception desk. The desk clerk smiled a respectful
greeting.

"Pleased to see you back again, Mr. Van Aldin," he said.

The American millionaire nodded his head in a casual greeting.

"Everything all right?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. Major Knighton is upstairs in the suite now."

Van Aldin nodded again.

"Any mail?" he vouchsafed.

"They have all been sent up, Mr. Van Aldin. Oh! wait a minute."

He dived into a pigeon hole, and produced a letter.

"Just come this minute," he explained.

Rufus Van Aldin took the letter from him, and as he saw the
handwriting, a woman's flowing hand, his face was suddenly transformed.
The harsh contours of it softened, and the hard line of his mouth
relaxed. He looked a different man. He walked across to the lift with
the letter in his hand and the smile still on his lips.

In the drawing-room of his suite, a young man was sitting at a desk
nimbly sorting correspondence with the ease born of long practice. He
sprang up as Van Aldin entered.

"Hallo, Knighton!"

"Glad to see you back, sir. Had a good time?"

"So-so!" said the millionaire unemotionally. "Paris is rather a
one-horse city nowadays. Still--I got what I went over for."

He smiled to himself rather grimly.

"You usually do, I believe," said the secretary, laughing.

"That's so," agreed the other.

He spoke in a matter-of-fact manner, as one stating a well-known fact.
Throwing off his heavy overcoat, he advanced to the desk.

"Anything urgent?"

"I don't think so, sir. Mostly the usual stuff. I have not quite
finished sorting it out."

Van Aldin nodded briefly. He was a man who seldom expressed either
blame or praise. His methods with those he employed were simple;
he gave them a fair trial and dismissed promptly those who were
inefficient. His selections of people were unconventional. Knighton,
for instance, he had met casually at a Swiss resort two months
previously. He had approved of the fellow, looked up his war record,
and found in it the explanation of the limp with which he walked.
Knighton had made no secret of the fact that he was looking for a
job, and indeed diffidently asked the millionaire if he knew of any
available post. Van Aldin remembered, with a grim smile of amusement,
the young man's complete astonishment when he had been offered the post
of secretary to the great man himself.

"But--but I have no experience of business," he had stammered.

"That doesn't matter a cuss," Van Aldin had replied. "I have got three
secretaries already to attend to that kind of thing. But I am likely
to be in England for the next six months, and I want an Englishman
who--well, knows the ropes--and can attend to the social side of things
for me."

So far, Van Aldin had found his judgment confirmed. Knighton had proved
quick, intelligent, and resourceful, and he had a distinct charm of
manner.

The secretary indicated three or four letters placed by themselves on
the top of the desk.

"It might perhaps be as well, sir, if you glanced at these," he
suggested. "The top one is about the Colton agreement--"

But Rufus Van Aldin held up a protesting hand.

"I am not going to look at a durned thing to-night," he declared. "They
can all wait till the morning. Except this one," he added, looking down
at the letter he held in his hand. And again that strange transforming
smile stole over his face.

Richard Knighton smiled sympathetically.

"Mrs. Kettering?" he murmured. "She rang up yesterday and to-day. She
seems very anxious to see you at once, sir."

"Does she, now!"

The smile faded from the millionaire's face. He ripped open the
envelope which he held in his hand and took out the enclosed sheet. As
he read it his face darkened, his mouth set grimly in the line which
Wall Street knew so well, and his brows knit themselves ominously.
Knighton turned tactfully away, and went on opening letters and sorting
them. A muttered oath escaped the millionaire, and his clenched fist
hit the table sharply.

"I'll not stand for this," he muttered to himself. "Poor little girl,
it's a good thing she has her old father behind her."

He walked up and down the room for some minutes, his brows drawn
together in a scowl. Knighton still bent assiduously over the desk.
Suddenly Van Aldin came to an abrupt halt. He took up his overcoat from
the chair where he had thrown it.

"Are you going out again, sir?"

"Yes; I'm going round to see my daughter."

"If Colton's people ring up--"

"Tell them to go to the devil," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said the secretary unemotionally.

Van Aldin had his overcoat on by now. Cramming his hat upon his head,
he went towards the door. He paused with his hand upon the handle.

"You are a good fellow, Knighton," he said. "You don't worry me when I
am rattled."

Knighton smiled a little, but made no reply.

"Ruth is my only child," said Van Aldin, "and there is no one on this
earth who knows quite what she means to me."

A faint smile irradiated his face. He slipped his hand into his pocket.

"Care to see something, Knighton?"

He came back towards the secretary.

From his pocket he drew out a parcel carelessly wrapped in brown paper.
He tossed off the wrapping and disclosed a big, shabby, red velvet
case. In the centre of it were some twisted initials surmounted by a
crown. He snapped the case open, and the secretary drew in his breath
sharply. Against the slightly dingy white of the interior, the stones
glowed like blood.

"My God! sir," said Knighton. "Are they--are they real?"

Van Aldin laughed a quiet little cackle of amusement.

"I don't wonder at your asking that. Amongst these rubies are the three
largest in the world. Catherine of Russia wore them, Knighton. That
centre one there is known as Heart of Fire. It's perfect--not a flaw in
it."

"But," the secretary murmured, "they must be worth a fortune."

"Four or five hundred thousand dollars," said Van Aldin nonchalantly,
"and that is apart from the historical interest."

"And you carry them about--like that, loose in your pocket?"

Van Aldin laughed amusedly.

"I guess so. You see, they are my little present for Ruthie."

The secretary smiled discreetly.

"I can understand now Mrs. Kettering's anxiety over the telephone," he
murmured.

But Van Aldin shook his head. The hard look returned to his face.

"You are wrong there," he said. "She doesn't know about these; they are
my little surprise for her."

He shut the case, and began slowly to wrap it up again.

"It's a hard thing, Knighton," he said, "how little one can do for
those one loves. I can buy a good portion of the earth for Ruth, if it
would be any use to her, but it isn't. I can hang these things round
her neck and give her a moment or two's pleasure, maybe, but--"

He shook his head.

"When a woman is not happy in her home--"

He left the sentence unfinished. The secretary nodded discreetly. He
knew, none better, the reputation of the Hon. Derek Kettering. Van
Aldin sighed. Slipping the parcel back in his coat pocket, he nodded to
Knighton and left the room.




                          4. In Curzon Street


The Hon. Mrs. Derek Kettering lived in Curzon Street. The butler who
opened the door recognized Rufus Van Aldin at once and permitted
himself a discreet smile of greeting. He led the way upstairs to the
big double drawing-room on the first floor.

A woman who was sitting by the window started up with a cry.

"Why, Dad, if that isn't too good for anything! I've been telephoning
Major Knighton all day to try and get hold of you, but he couldn't say
for sure when you were expected back."

Ruth Kettering was twenty-eight years of age. Without being beautiful,
or in the real sense of the word even pretty, she was striking looking
because of her colouring. Van Aldin had been called Carrots and Ginger
in his time, and Ruth's hair was almost pure auburn. With it went dark
eyes and very black lashes--the effect somewhat enhanced by art. She
was tall and slender, and moved well. At a careless glance it was the
face of a Raphael Madonna. Only if one looked closely did one perceive
the same line of jaw and chin as in Van Aldin's face, bespeaking the
same hardness and determination. It suited the man, but suited the
woman less well. From her childhood upward Ruth Van Aldin had been
accustomed to having her own way, and any one who had ever stood up
against her soon realized that Rufus Van Aldin's daughter never gave in.

"Knighton told me you'd 'phoned him," said Van Aldin. "I only got back
from Paris half an hour ago. What's all this about Derek?"

Ruth Kettering flushed angrily.

"It's unspeakable. It's beyond all limits," she cried. "He--he doesn't
seem to listen to anything I say."

There was bewilderment as well as anger in her voice.

"He'll listen to me," said the millionaire grimly.

Ruth went on.

"I've hardly seen him for the last month. He goes about everywhere with
that woman."

"With what woman?"

"Mirelle. She dances at the Parthenon, you know."

Van Aldin nodded.

"I was down at Leconbury last week. I--I spoke to Lord Leconbury. He
was awfully sweet to me, sympathized entirely. He said he'd give Derek
a good talking to."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin.

"What do you mean by 'Ah!', Dad?"

"Just what you think I mean, Ruthie. Poor old Leconbury is a wash-out.
Of course he sympathized with you, of course he tried to soothe you
down. Having got his son and heir married to the daughter of one of the
richest men in the States, he naturally doesn't want to mess the thing
up. But he's got one foot in the grave already, every one knows that,
and anything he may say will cut darned little ice with Derek."

"Can't _you_ do anything, Dad?" urged Ruth, after a minute or two.

"I might," said the millionaire. He waited a second reflectively, and
then went on. "There are several things I might do, but there's only
one that will be any real good. How much pluck have you got, Ruthie?"

She stared at him. He nodded back at her.

"I mean just what I say. Have you got the grit to admit to all the
world that you've made a mistake? There's only one way out of this
mess, Ruthie. Cut your losses and start afresh."

"You mean--"

"Divorce."

"Divorce!"

Van Aldin smiled drily.

"You say that word, Ruth, as though you'd never heard it before. And
yet your friends are doing it all round you every day."

"Oh! I know that. But--"

She stopped, biting her lip. Her father nodded comprehendingly.

"I know, Ruth. You're like me, you can't bear to let go. But I've
learnt, and you've got to learn, that there are times when it's the
only way. I might find ways of whistling Derek back to you, but it
would all come to the same in the end. _He's no good_, Ruth; he's
rotten through and through. And mind you, I blame myself for ever
letting you marry him. But you were kind of set on having him, and he
seemed in earnest about turning over a new leaf--and well, I'd crossed
you once, honey...."

He did not look at her as he said the last words. Had he done so, he
might have seen the swift colour that came up in her face.

"You did," she said in a hard voice.

"I was too darned softhearted to do it a second time. I can't tell you
how I wish I had, though. You've led a poor kind of life for the last
few years, Ruth."

"It has not been very--agreeable," agreed Mrs. Kettering.

"That's why I say to you that this thing has got to _stop_!" He brought
his hand down with a bang on the table. "You may have a hankering after
the fellow still. _Cut it out._ Face facts. Derek Kettering married you
for your money. That's all there is to it. Get rid of him, Ruth."

Ruth Kettering looked down at the ground for some moments, then she
said, without raising her head:

"Supposing he doesn't consent?"

Van Aldin looked at her in astonishment.

"He won't have a say in the matter."

She flushed and bit her lip.

"No--no--of course not. I only meant--"

She stopped. Her father eyed her keenly.

"What did you mean?"

"I meant--" She paused, choosing her words carefully. "He mayn't take
it lying down."

The millionaire's chin shot out grimly.

"You mean he'll fight the case? Let him! But, as a matter of fact,
you're wrong. He won't fight. Any solicitor he consults will tell him
he hasn't a leg to stand upon."

"You don't think"--she hesitated--"I mean--out of sheer spite against
me--he might, try to make it awkward?"

Her father looked at her in some astonishment.

"Fight the case, you mean?"

He shook his head.

"Very unlikely. You see, he would have to have something to go upon."

Mrs. Kettering did not answer. Van Aldin looked at her sharply.

"Come, Ruth, out with it. There's something troubling you--what is it?"

"Nothing, nothing at all."

But her voice was unconvincing.

"You are dreading the publicity, eh? Is that it? You leave it to me.
I'll put the whole thing through so smoothly that there will be no fuss
at all."

"Very well, Dad, if you really think it's the best thing to be done."

"Got a fancy for the fellow still, Ruth? Is that it?"

"No."

The word came with no uncertain emphasis. Van Aldin seemed satisfied.
He patted his daughter on the shoulder.

"It will be all right, little girl. Don't you worry any. Now let's
forget all about this. I have brought you a present from Paris."

"For me? Something very nice?"

"I hope you'll think so," said Van Aldin, smiling.

He took the parcel from his coat pocket and handed it to her. She
unwrapped it eagerly, and snapped open the case. A long-drawn "Oh!"
came from her lips. Ruth Kettering loved jewels--always had done so.

"Dad, how--how wonderful!"

"Rather in a class by themselves, aren't they?" said the millionaire,
with satisfaction. "You like them, eh?"

"Like them? Dad, they're unique. How did you get hold of them?"

Van Aldin smiled.

"Ah! that's my secret. They had to be bought privately, of course. They
are rather well known. See that big stone in the middle? You have heard
of it, maybe; that's the historic 'Heart of Fire.'"

"Heart of Fire!" repeated Mrs. Kettering.

She had taken the stones from the case and was holding them against
her breast. The millionaire watched her. He was thinking of the series
of women who had worn the jewels. The heartaches, the despairs, the
jealousies. "Heart of Fire," like all famous stones, had left behind
it a trail of tragedy and violence. Held in Ruth Kettering's assured
hand, it seemed to lose its potency of evil. With her cool, equable
poise, this woman of the western world seemed a negation to tragedy or
heart-burnings. Ruth returned the stones to their case; then, jumping
up, she flung her arms round her father's neck.

"Thank you, thank you, thank you, Dad! They are wonderful! You do give
me the most marvellous presents always."

"That's all right," said Van Aldin, patting her shoulder. "You are all
I have, you know, Ruthie."

"You will stay to dinner, won't you, father?"

"I don't think so. You were going out, weren't you?"

"Yes, but I can easily put that off. Nothing very exciting."

"No," said Van Aldin. "Keep your engagement. I have got a good deal to
attend to. See you to-morrow, my dear. Perhaps if I 'phone you, we can
meet at Galbraiths'?"

Messrs. Galbraith, Galbraith, Cuthbertson, & Galbraith were Van Aldin's
London solicitors.

"Very well, Dad." She hesitated. "I suppose it--this--won't keep me
from going to the Riviera?"

"When are you off?"

"On the fourteenth."

"Oh, that will be all right. These things take a long time to mature.
By the way, Ruth, I shouldn't take those rubies abroad if I were you.
Leave them at the bank."

Mrs. Kettering nodded.

"We don't want to have you robbed and murdered for the sake of 'Heart
of Fire,'" said the millionaire jocosely.

"And yet you carried it about in your pocket loose," retorted his
daughter, smiling.

"Yes--"

Something, some hesitation, caught her attention.

"What is it, Dad?"

"Nothing." He smiled. "Thinking of a little adventure of mine in Paris."

"An adventure?"

"Yes, the night I bought these things."

He made a gesture towards the jewel case.

"Oh, do tell me."

"Nothing to tell, Ruthie. Some apache fellows got a bit fresh and I
shot at them and they got off. That's all."

She looked at him with some pride.

"You're a tough proposition, Dad."

"You bet I am, Ruthie."

He kissed her affectionately and departed. On arriving back at the
Savoy, he gave a curt order to Knighton.

"Get hold of a man called Goby; you'll find his address in my private
book. He's to be here to-morrow morning at half-past nine."

"Yes, sir."

"I also want to see Mr. Kettering. Run him to earth for me if you can.
Try his Club--at any rate, get hold of him somehow, and arrange for me
to see him here to-morrow morning. Better make it latish, about twelve.
His sort aren't early risers."

The secretary nodded in comprehension of these instructions. Van Aldin
gave himself into the hands of his valet. His bath was prepared, and
as he lay luxuriating in the hot water, his mind went back over the
conversation with his daughter. On the whole he was well satisfied. His
keen mind had long since accepted the fact that divorce was the only
possible way out. Ruth had agreed to the proposed solution with more
readiness than he had hoped for. Yet, in spite of her acquiescence, he
was left with a vague sense of uneasiness. Something about her manner,
he felt, had not been quite natural. He frowned to himself.

"Maybe I'm fanciful," he muttered, "and yet--I bet there's something
she has not told me."




                         5. A Useful Gentleman


Rufus Van Aldin had just finished the sparse breakfast of coffee and
dry toast, which was all he ever allowed himself, when Knighton entered
the room.

"Mr. Goby is below, sir, waiting to see you."

The millionaire glanced at the clock. It was just half-past nine.

"All right," he said curtly. "He can come up."

A minute or two later, Mr. Goby entered the room. He was a small,
elderly man, shabbily dressed, with eyes that looked carefully all
round the room, and never at the person he was addressing.

"Good morning, Goby," said the millionaire. "Take a chair."

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin."

Mr. Goby sat down with his hands on his knees, and gazed earnestly at
the radiator.

"I have got a job for you."

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin?"

"My daughter is married to the Hon. Derek Kettering, as you may perhaps
know."

Mr. Goby transferred his gaze from the radiator to the left-hand drawer
of the desk, and permitted a deprecating smile to pass over his face.
Mr. Goby knew a great many things, but he always hated to admit the
fact.

"By my advice, she is about to file a petition for divorce. That, of
course, is a solicitor's business. But, for private reasons, I want the
fullest and most complete information."

Mr. Goby looked at the cornice and murmured:

"About Mr. Kettering?"

"About Mr. Kettering."

"Very good, sir."

Mr. Goby rose to his feet.

"When will you have it ready for me?"

"Are you in a hurry, sir?"

"I'm always in a hurry," said the millionaire.

Mr. Goby smiled understandingly at the fender.

"Shall we say two o'clock this afternoon, sir?" he asked.

"Excellent," approved the other. "Good morning, Goby."

"Good morning, Mr. Van Aldin."

"That's a very useful man," said the millionaire as Goby went out and
his secretary came in. "In his own line he's a specialist."

"What is his line?"

"Information. Give him twenty-four hours and he would lay the private
life of the Archbishop of Canterbury bare for you."

"A useful sort of chap," said Knighton, with a smile.

"He has been useful to me once or twice," said Van Aldin. "Now then,
Knighton, I'm ready for work."

The next few hours saw a vast quantity of business rapidly transacted.
It was half-past twelve when the telephone bell rang, and Mr. Van Aldin
was informed that Mr. Kettering had called. Knighton looked at Van
Aldin, and interpreted his brief nod.

"Ask Mr. Kettering to come up, please."

The secretary gathered up his papers and departed. He and the visitor
passed each other in the doorway, and Derek Kettering stood aside to
let the other go out. Then he came in, shutting the door behind him.

"Good morning, sir. You are very anxious to see me, I hear."

The lazy voice with its slightly ironic inflection roused memories in
Van Aldin. There was charm in it--there had always been charm in it. He
looked piercingly at his son-in-law. Derek Kettering was thirty-four,
lean of build, with a dark, narrow face, which had even now something
indescribably boyish in it.

"Come in," said Van Aldin curtly. "Sit down."

Kettering flung himself lightly into an arm-chair. He looked at his
father-in-law with a kind of tolerant amusement.

"Not seen you for a long time, sir," he remarked pleasantly. "About two
years, I should say. Seen Ruth yet?"

"I saw her last night," said Van Aldin.

"Looking very fit, isn't she?" said the other lightly.

"I didn't know you had had much opportunity of judging," said Van Aldin
drily.

Derek Kettering raised his eyebrows.

"Oh, we sometimes meet at the same night club, you know," he said
airily.

"I am not going to beat about the bush," Van Aldin said curtly. "I have
advised Ruth to file a petition for divorce."

Derek Kettering seemed unmoved.

"How drastic!" he murmured. "Do you mind if I smoke, sir?"

He lit a cigarette, and puffed out a cloud of smoke as he added
nonchalantly:

"And what did Ruth say?"

"Ruth proposes to take my advice," said her father.

"Does she really?"

"Is that all you have got to say?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

Kettering flicked his ash into the grate.

"I think, you know," he said, with a detached air, "that she's making a
great mistake."

"From your point of view she doubtless is," said Van Aldin grimly.

"Oh, come now," said the other; "don't let's be personal. I really
wasn't thinking of myself at the moment. I was thinking of Ruth. You
know my poor old Governor really can't last much longer; all the
doctors say so. Ruth had better give it a couple more years, then I
shall be Lord Leconbury, and she can be châtelaine of Leconbury, which
is what she married me for."

"I won't have any of your darned impudence," roared Van Aldin.

Derek Kettering smiled at him quite unmoved.

"I agree with you. It's an obsolete idea," he said. "There's nothing
in a title nowadays. Still, Leconbury is a very fine old place, and,
after all, we are one of the oldest families in England. It will be
very annoying for Ruth if she divorces me to find me marrying again,
and some other woman queening it at Leconbury instead of her."

"I am serious, young man," said Van Aldin.

"Oh, so am I," said Kettering. "I am in very low water financially; it
will put me in a nasty hole if Ruth divorces me, and, after all, if she
has stood it for ten years, why not stand it a little longer? I give
you my word of honour that the old man can't possibly last out another
eighteen months, and, as I said before, it's a pity Ruth shouldn't get
what she married me for."

"You suggest that my daughter married you for your title and position?"

Derek Kettering laughed a laugh that was not all amusement.

"You don't think it was a question of a love match?" he asked.

"I know," said Van Aldin slowly, "that you spoke very differently in
Paris ten years ago."

"Did I? Perhaps I did. Ruth was very beautiful, you know--rather like
an angel or a saint, or something that had stepped down from a niche
in a church. I had fine ideas, I remember, of turning over a new leaf,
of settling down and living up to the highest traditions of English
home-life with a beautiful wife who loved me."

He laughed again, rather more discordantly.

"But you don't believe that, I suppose?" he said.

"I have no doubt at all that you married Ruth for her money," said Van
Aldin unemotionally.

"And that she married me for love?" asked the other ironically.

"Certainly," said Van Aldin.

Derek Kettering stared at him for a minute or two, then he nodded
reflectively.

"I see you believe that," he said. "So did I at the time. I can assure
you, my dear father-in-law, I was very soon undeceived."

"I don't know what you are getting at," said Van Aldin, "and I don't
care. You have treated Ruth darned badly."

"Oh, I have," agreed Kettering lightly, "but she's tough, you know.
She's your daughter. Underneath the pink-and-white softness of her
she's as hard as granite. You have always been known as a hard man, so
I have been told, but Ruth is harder than you are. You, at any rate,
love one person better than yourself. Ruth never has and never will."

"That is enough," said Van Aldin. "I asked you here so that I could
tell you fair and square what I meant to do. My girl has got to have
some happiness, and remember this, I am behind her."

Derek Kettering got up and stood by the mantelpiece. He tossed away his
cigarette. When he spoke, his voice was very quiet.

"What exactly do you mean by that, I wonder?" he said.

"I mean," said Van Aldin, "that you had better not try to defend the
case."

"Oh," said Kettering. "Is that a threat?"

"You can take it any way you please," said Van Aldin.

Kettering drew a chair up to the table. He sat down fronting the
millionaire.

"And supposing," he said softly, "that, just for argument's sake, I did
defend the case?"

Van Aldin shrugged his shoulders.

"You have not got a leg to stand upon, you young fool. Ask your
solicitors, they will soon tell you. Your conduct has been notorious,
the talk of London."

"Ruth has been kicking up a row about Mirelle, I suppose. Very foolish
of her. I don't interfere with her friends."

"What do you mean?" said Van Aldin sharply.

Derek Kettering laughed.

"I see you don't know everything sir," he said. "You are, perhaps
naturally, prejudiced."

He took up his hat and stick and moved towards the door.

"Giving advice is not much in my line." He delivered his final thrust.
"But, in this case, I should advise most strongly perfect frankness
between father and daughter."

He passed quickly out of the room and shut the door behind him just as
the millionaire sprang up.

"Now, what the hell did he mean by that?" said Van Aldin as he sank
back into his chair again.

All his uneasiness returned in full force. There was something here
that he had not yet got to the bottom of. The telephone was by his
elbow; he seized it, and asked for the number of his daughter's house.

"Hallo! Hallo! Is that Mayfair 81907? Mrs. Kettering in? Oh, she's
out, is she? Yes, out to lunch. What time will she be in? You don't
know? Oh, very good; no, there's no message."

He slammed the receiver down again angrily. At two o'clock he was
pacing the floor of his room waiting expectantly for Goby. The latter
was ushered in at ten minutes past two.

"Well?" barked the millionaire sharply.

But little Mr. Goby was not to be hurried. He sat down at the table,
produced a very shabby pocket-book, and proceeded to read from it
in a monotonous voice. The millionaire listened attentively, with
an increasing satisfaction. Goby came to a full stop, and looked
attentively at the wastepaper-basket.

"Um!" said Van Aldin. "That seems pretty definite. The case will go
through like winking. The hotel evidence is all right, I suppose?"

"Cast iron," said Mr. Goby, and looked malevolently at a gilt arm-chair.

"And financially he's in very low water. He's trying to raise a
loan now, you say? Has already raised practically all he can upon
his expectations from his father. Once the news of the divorce gets
about, he won't be able to raise another cent, and not only that, his
obligations can be bought up and pressure can be put upon him from that
quarter. We have got him, Goby; we have got him in a cleft stick."

He hit the table a bang with his fist. His face was grim and triumphant.

"The information," said Mr. Goby in a thin voice, "seems satisfactory."

"I have got to go round to Curzon Street now," said the millionaire. "I
am much obliged to you, Goby. You are the goods all right."

A pale smile of gratification showed itself on the little man's face.

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin," he said; "I try to do my best."

Van Aldin did not go direct to Curzon Street. He went first to the
City, where he had two interviews which added to his satisfaction. From
there he took the tube to Down Street. As he was walking along Curzon
Street, a figure came out of No. 160, and turned up the street towards
him, so that they passed each other on the pavement. For a moment,
the millionaire had fancied it might be Derek Kettering himself; the
height and build were not unlike. But as they came face to face, he saw
that the man was a stranger to him. At least--no, not a stranger; his
face awoke some call of recognition in the millionaire's mind, and it
was associated definitely with something unpleasant. He cudgelled his
brains in vain, but the thing eluded him. He went on, shaking his head
irritably. He hated to be baffled.

Ruth Kettering was clearly expecting him. She ran to him and kissed him
when he entered.

"Well, Dad, how are things going?"

"Very well," said Van Aldin; "but I have got a word or two to say to
you, Ruth."

Almost insensibly he felt the change in her; something shrewd and
watchful replaced the impulsiveness of her greeting. She sat down in a
big arm-chair.

"Well, Dad?" she asked. "What is it?"

"I saw your husband this morning," said Van Aldin.

"You saw Derek?"

"I did. He said a lot of things, most of which were darned cheek. Just
as he was leaving, he said something that I didn't understand. He
advised me to be sure that there was perfect frankness between father
and daughter. What did he mean by that, Ruthie?"

Mrs. Kettering moved a little in her chair.

"I--I don't know, Dad. How should I?"

"Of course you know," said Van Aldin. "He said something else, about
his having his friends and not interfering with yours. What did he mean
by that?"

"I don't know," said Ruth Kettering again.

Van Aldin sat down. His mouth set itself in a grim line.

"See here, Ruth. I am not going into this with my eyes closed. I am not
at all sure that that husband of yours doesn't mean to make trouble.
Now, he can't do it, I am sure of that. I have got the means to silence
him, to shut his mouth for good and all, but I have got to know if
there's any need to use those means. What did he mean by your having
your own friends?"

Mrs. Kettering shrugged her shoulders.

"I have got lots of friends," she said uncertainly. "I don't know what
he meant, I am sure."

"You do," said Van Aldin.

He was speaking now as he might have spoken to a business adversary.

"I will put it plainer. Who is the man?"

"What man?"

"_The_ man. That's what Derek was driving at. Some special man who is
a friend of yours. You needn't worry, honey, I know there is nothing
in it, but we have got to look at everything as it might appear to the
Court. They can twist these things about a good deal, you know. I want
to know who the man is, and just how friendly you have been with him."

Ruth didn't answer. Her hands were kneading themselves together in
intense nervous absorption.

"Come, honey," said Van Aldin in a softer voice. "Don't be afraid of
your old Dad. I was not too harsh, was I, even that time in Paris?--By
gosh!"

He stopped, thunderstruck.

"That's who it was," he murmured to himself. "I thought I knew his
face."

"What are you talking about, Dad? I don't understand."

The millionaire strode across to her and took her firmly by the wrist.

"See here, Ruth, have you been seeing that fellow again?"

"What fellow?"

"The one we had all that fuss about years ago. You know who I mean well
enough."

"You mean"--she hesitated--"you mean the Comte de la Roche?"

"Comte de la Roche!" snorted Van Aldin. "I told you at the time that
the man was no better than a swindler. You had entangled yourself with
him then very deeply, but I got you out of his clutches."

"Yes, you did," said Ruth bitterly. "And I married Derek Kettering."

"You wanted to," said the millionaire sharply.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"And now," said Van Aldin slowly, "you have been seeing him
again--after all I told you. He has been in the house to-day. I met him
outside, and couldn't place him for the moment."

Ruth Kettering had recovered her composure.

"I want to tell you one thing, Dad; you are wrong about Armand--the
Comte de la Roche, I mean. Oh, I know there were several regrettable
incidents in his youth--he has told me about them; but--well, he has
cared for me always. It broke his heart when you parted us in Paris,
and now--"

She was interrupted by the snort of indignation her father gave.

"So you fell for that stuff, did you? You, a daughter of mine! My God!"

He threw up his hands.

"That women can be such darned fools!"




                              6. Mirelle


Derek Kettering emerged from Van Aldin's suite so precipitantly that he
collided with a lady passing across the corridor. He apologized, and
she accepted his apologies with a smiling reassurance and passed on,
leaving with him a pleasant impression of a soothing personality and
rather fine grey eyes.

For all his nonchalance, his interview with his father-in-law had
shaken him more than he cared to show. He had a solitary lunch, and
after it, frowning to himself a little, he went around to the sumptuous
flat that housed the lady known as Mirelle. A trim Frenchwoman received
him with smiles.

"But enter then, Monsieur. Madame reposes herself."

He was ushered into the long room with its Eastern setting which
he knew so well. Mirelle was lying on the divan, supported by an
incredible number of cushions, all in varying shades of amber, to
harmonize with the yellow ochre of her complexion. The dancer was a
beautifully made woman, and if her face, beneath its mask of yellow,
was in truth somewhat haggard, it had a bizarre charm of its own, and
her orange lips smiled invitingly at Derek Kettering.

He kissed her, and flung himself into a chair.

"What have you been doing with yourself? Just got up, I suppose?"

The orange mouth widened into a long smile.

"No," said the dancer. "I have been at work."

She flung out a long, pale hand towards the piano, which was littered
with untidy music scores.

"Ambrose has been here. He has been playing me the new Opera."

Kettering nodded without paying much attention. He was profoundly
uninterested in Claud Ambrose and the latter's operatic setting of
Ibsen's _Peer Gynt_. So was Mirelle, for that matter, regarding it
merely as a unique opportunity for her own presentation as Anitra.

"It is a marvellous dance," she murmured. "I shall put all the passion
of the desert into it. I shall dance hung over with jewels--ah! and,
by the way, _mon ami_, there is a pearl that I saw yesterday in Bond
Street--a black pearl."

She paused, looking at him invitingly.

"My dear girl," said Kettering, "it's no use talking of black pearls to
me. At the present minute, as far as I am concerned, the fat is in the
fire."

She was quick to respond to his tone. She sat up, her big black eyes
widening.

"What is that you say, Dereek? What has happened?"

"My esteemed father-in-law," said Kettering, "is preparing to go off
the deep-end."

"Eh?"

"In other words, he wants Ruth to divorce me."

"How stupid!" said Mirelle. "Why should she want to divorce you?"

Derek Kettering grinned.

"Mainly because of you, _chérie_!" he said.

Mirelle shrugged her shoulders.

"That is foolish," she observed in a matter-of-fact voice.

"Very foolish," agreed Derek.

"What are you going to do about it?" demanded Mirelle.

"My dear girl, what can I do? On the one side, the man with unlimited
money; on the other side, the man with unlimited debts. There is no
question as to who will come out on top."

"They are extraordinary, these Americans," commented Mirelle. "It is
not as though your wife were fond of you."

"Well," said Derek, "what are we going to do about it?"

She looked at him inquiringly. He came over and took both her hands in
his.

"Are you going to stick to me?"

"What do you mean? After--"

"Yes," said Kettering. "After, when the creditors come down like wolves
on the fold. I am damned fond of you, Mirelle; are you going to let me
down?"

She pulled her hands away from him.

"You know I adore you, Dereek."

He caught the note of evasion in her voice.

"So that's that, is it? The rats will leave the sinking ship."

"Ah, Dereek!"

"Out with it," he said violently. "You will fling me over; is that it?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I am fond of you, _mon ami_--indeed I am fond of you. You are very
charming--_un beau garçon_, but _ce n'est pas pratique_."

"You are a rich man's luxury, eh? Is that it?"

"If you like to put it that way."

She leaned back on the cushions, her head flung back.

"All the same, I am fond of you, Dereek."

He went over to the window and stood there some time looking out, with
his back to her. Presently the dancer raised herself on her elbow and
stared at him curiously.

"What are you thinking of, _mon ami_?"

He grinned at her over his shoulder, a curious grin, that made her
vaguely uneasy.

"As it happened, I was thinking of a woman, my dear."

"A woman, eh?"

Mirelle pounced on something that she could understand.

"You are thinking of some other woman, is that it?"

"Oh, you needn't worry; it is purely a fancy portrait. 'Portrait of a
lady with grey eyes.'"

Mirelle said sharply, "When did you meet her?"

Derek Kettering laughed, and his laughter had a mocking, ironical sound.

"I ran into the lady in the corridor of the Savoy Hotel."

"Well! What did she say?"

"As far as I can remember, I said, 'I beg your pardon,' and she said,
'It doesn't matter,' or words to that effect."

"And then?" persisted the dancer.

Kettering shrugged his shoulders.

"And then--nothing. That was the end of the incident."

"I don't understand a word of what you are talking about," declared the
dancer.

"Portrait of a lady with grey eyes," murmured Derek reflectively. "Just
as well I am never likely to meet her again."

"Why?"

"She might bring me bad luck. Women do."

Mirelle slipped quickly from her couch, and came across to him, laying
one long, snake-like arm round his neck.

"You are foolish, Dereek," she murmured. "You are very foolish. You
are _beau garçon_, and I adore you, but I am not made to be poor--no,
decidedly I am not made to be poor. Now listen to me; everything is
very simple. You must make it up with your wife."

"I am afraid that's not going to be actually in the sphere of practical
politics," said Derek drily.

"How do you say? I do not understand."

"Van Aldin, my dear, is not taking any. He is the kind of man who makes
up his mind and sticks to it."

"I have heard of him," nodded the dancer. "He is very rich, is he not?
Almost the richest man in America. A few days ago, in Paris, he bought
the most wonderful ruby in the world--'Heart of Fire' it is called."

Kettering did not answer. The dancer went on musingly:

"It is a wonderful stone--a stone that should belong to a woman like
me. I love jewels, Dereek; they say something to me. Ah! to wear a ruby
like 'Heart of Fire.'"

She gave a little sigh, and then became practical once more.

"You don't understand these things, Dereek; you are only a man. Van
Aldin will give these rubies to his daughter, I suppose. Is she his
only child?"

"Yes."

"Then when he dies, she will inherit all his money. She will be a rich
woman."

"She is a rich woman already," said Kettering drily. "He settled a
couple of millions on her at her marriage."

"A couple of millions! But that is immense. And if she died suddenly,
eh? That would all come to you?"

"As things stand at present," said Kettering slowly, "it would. As far
as I know she has not made a will."

"_Mon Dieu!_" said the dancer. "If she were to die, what a solution
that would be."

There was a moment's pause, and then Derek Kettering laughed outright.

"I like your simple, practical mind, Mirelle, but I am afraid what you
desire won't come to pass. My wife is an extremely healthy person."

"_Eh, bien!_" said Mirelle; "there are accidents."

He looked at her sharply but did not answer.

She went on.

"But you are right, _mon ami_, we must not dwell on possibilities. See
now, my little Dereek, there must be no more talk of this divorce. Your
wife must give up the idea."

"And if she won't?"

The dancer's eyes narrowed to slits.

"I think she will, my friend. She is one of those who would not like
the publicity. There are one or two pretty stories that she would not
like her friends to read in the newspapers."

"What do you mean?" asked Kettering sharply.

Mirelle laughed, her head thrown back.

"_Parbleu!_ I mean the gentleman who calls himself the Comte de la
Roche. I know all about him. I am Parisienne, you remember. He was her
lover before she married you, was he not?"

Kettering took her sharply by the shoulders.

"That is a damned lie," he said, "and please remember that, after all,
you are speaking of my wife."

Mirelle was a little sobered.

"You are extraordinary, you English," she complained. "All the same,
I dare say that you may be right. The Americans are so cold, are they
not? But you will permit me to say, _mon ami_, that she was _in love
with him_ before she married you, and her father stepped in and sent
the Comte about his business. And the little Mademoiselle, she wept
many tears! But she obeyed. Still, you must know as well as I do,
Dereek, that it is a very different story now. She sees him nearly
every day, and on the fourteenth she goes to Paris to meet him."

"How do you know all this?" demanded Kettering.

"Me? I have friends in Paris, my dear Dereek, who know the Comte
intimately. It is all arranged. She is going to the Riviera, so she
says, but in reality the Comte meets her in Paris and--who knows! Yes,
yes, you can take my word for it, it is all arranged."

Derek Kettering stood motionless.

"You see," purred the dancer, "if you are clever, you have her in the
hollow of your hand. You can make things very awkward for her."

"Oh, for God's sake be quiet," cried Kettering. "Shut your cursed
mouth!"

Mirelle flung herself down again on the divan with a laugh. Kettering
caught up his hat and coat and left the flat, banging the door
violently. And still the dancer sat on the divan and laughed softly to
herself. She was not displeased with her work.




                              7. Letters


    "_Mrs. Samuel Harfield presents her compliments to Miss Katherine
    Grey and wishes to point out that under the circumstances Miss Grey
    may not be aware--_"

Mrs. Harfield, having written so far fluently, came to a dead stop,
held up by what has proved an insuperable difficulty to many other
people--namely, the difficulty of expressing oneself fluently in the
third person.

After a minute or two of hesitation, Mrs. Harfield tore up the sheet of
notepaper and started afresh.

    "_Dear Miss Grey--Whilst fully appreciating the adequate way you
    discharged your duties to my Cousin Jane (whose recent death has
    indeed been a severe blow to us all), I cannot but feel--_"

Again Mrs. Harfield came to a stop. Once more the letter was consigned
to the wastepaper-basket. It was not until four false starts had been
made that Mrs. Harfield at last produced an epistle that satisfied her.
It was duly sealed and stamped and addressed to Miss Katherine Grey,
Little Crampton, St. Mary Mead, Kent, and it lay beside that lady's
plate on the following morning at breakfast-time in company with a more
important looking communication in a long blue envelope.

Katherine Grey opened Mrs. Harfield's letter first. The finished
production ran as follows:

    "_Dear Miss Grey--My husband and I wish to express our thanks to
    you for your services to my poor cousin, Jane. Her death has been
    a great blow to us, though we were, of course, aware that her mind
    has been failing for some time past. I understand that her latter
    testamentary dispositions have been of a most peculiar character,
    and they would not hold good, of course, in any court of law. I
    have no doubt that, with your usual good sense, you have already
    realized this fact. If these matters can be arranged privately
    it is always so much better, my husband says. We shall be pleased
    to recommend you most highly for a similar post and hope that you
    will also accept a small present. Believe me, dear Miss Grey, Yours
    cordially,_

                                                 _Mary Anne Harfield._"

Katherine Grey read the letter through, smiled a little, and read it
a second time. Her face as she laid the letter down after the second
reading was distinctly amused. Then she took up the second letter.
After one brief perusal she laid it down and stared very straight in
front of her. This time she did not smile. Indeed, it would have been
hard for any one watching her to guess what emotions lay behind that
quiet, reflective gaze.

Katherine Grey was thirty-three. She came of good family, but her
father had lost all his money, and Katherine had had to work for her
living from an early age. She had been just twenty-three when she had
come to old Mrs. Harfield as companion.

It was generally recognized that old Mrs. Harfield was "difficult."
Companions came and went with startling rapidity. They arrived full of
hope and they usually left in tears. But from the moment Katherine Grey
set foot in Little Crampton, ten years ago, perfect peace had reigned.
No one knows how these things come about. Snake-charmers, they say, are
born, not made. Katherine Grey was born with the power of managing old
ladies, dogs, and small boys, and she did it without any apparent sense
of strain.

At twenty-three she had been a quiet girl with beautiful eyes. At
thirty-three she was a quiet woman, with those same grey eyes, shining
steadily out on the world with a kind of happy serenity that nothing
could shake. Moreover, she had been born with, and still possessed, a
sense of humour.

As she sat at the breakfast-table, staring in front of her, there was a
ring at the bell, accompanied by a very energetic rat-a-tat-tat at the
knocker. In another minute the little maid-servant opened the door and
announced rather breathlessly:

"Dr. Harrison."

The big, middle-aged doctor came bustling in with the energy and
breeziness that had been foreshadowed by his onslaught on the knocker.

"Good morning, Miss Grey."

"Good morning, Dr. Harrison."

"I dropped in early," began the doctor, "in case you should have heard
from one of those Harfield cousins. Mrs. Samuel, she calls herself--a
perfectly poisonous person."

Without a word, Katherine picked up Mrs. Harfield's letter from the
table and gave it to him. With a good deal of amusement she watched his
perusal of it, the drawing together of the bushy eyebrows, the snorts
and grunts of violent disapproval. He dashed it down again on the table.

"Perfectly monstrous," he fumed. "Don't you let it worry you, my dear.
They're talking through their hat. Mrs. Harfield's intellect was as
good as yours or mine and you won't get any one to say the contrary.
They wouldn't have a leg to stand upon, and they know it. All that talk
of taking it into court is pure bluff. Hence, this attempt to get round
you in a hole-and-corner way. And look here, my dear, don't let them
get round you with soft soap either. Don't get fancying it's your duty
to hand over the cash, or any tomfoolery of conscientious scruples."

"I'm afraid it hasn't occurred to me to have scruples," said Katherine.
"All these people are distant relatives of Mrs. Harfield's husband, and
they never came near her or took any notice of her in her lifetime."

"You're a sensible woman," said the doctor. "I know, none better, that
you've had a hard life of it for the last ten years. You're fully
entitled to enjoy the old lady's savings, such as they were."

Katherine smiled thoughtfully.

"Such as they were," she repeated. "You've no idea of the amount,
doctor?"

"Well--enough to bring in five hundred a year or so, I suppose."

Katherine nodded.

"That's what I thought," she said. "Now read this."

She handed him the letter she had taken from the long blue envelope.
The doctor read and uttered an exclamation of utter astonishment.

"Impossible," he muttered. "Impossible."

"She was one of the original shareholders in Mortaulds. Forty years ago
she must have had an income of eight or ten thousand a year. She has
never, I am sure, spent more than four hundred a year. She was always
terribly careful about money. I always believed that she was obliged
to be careful about every penny."

"And all the time the income has accumulated at compound interest. My
dear, you're going to be a very rich woman."

Katherine Grey nodded.

"Yes," she said, "I am."

She spoke in a detached, impersonal tone, as though she were looking at
the situation from outside.

"Well," said the doctor, preparing to depart, "you have all my
congratulations." He flicked Mrs. Samuel Harfield's letter with his
thumb. "Don't worry about that woman and her odious letter."

"It really isn't an odious letter," said Miss Grey tolerantly. "Under
the circumstances, I think it's really quite a natural thing to do."

"I have the gravest suspicions of you sometimes," said the doctor.

"Why?"

"The things that you find perfectly natural."

Katherine Grey laughed.

Doctor Harrison retailed the great news to his wife at lunch-time. She
was very excited about it.

"Fancy old Mrs. Harfield--with all that money. I'm glad she left it to
Katherine Grey. That girl's a saint."

The doctor made a wry face.

"Saints I always imagine must have been difficult people. Katherine
Grey is too human for a saint."

"She's a saint with a sense of humour," said the doctor's wife,
twinkling. "And, though I don't suppose you've ever noticed the fact,
she's extremely good looking."

"Katherine Grey?" The doctor was honestly surprised. "She's got very
nice eyes, I know."

"Oh, you men!" cried his wife. "Blind as bats. Katherine's got all the
makings of a beauty in her. All she wants is clothes!"

"Clothes? What's wrong with her clothes? She always looks very nice."

Mrs. Harrison gave an exasperated sigh, and the doctor rose preparatory
to starting on his rounds.

"You might look in on her, Polly," he suggested.

"I'm going to," said Mrs. Harrison promptly.

She made her call about three o'clock.

"My dear, I'm so glad," she said warmly, as she squeezed Katherine's
hand. "And every one in the village will be glad too."

"It's very nice of you to come and tell me," said Katherine. "I hoped
you would come in because I wanted to ask about Johnnie."

"Oh! Johnnie. Well--"

Johnnie was Mrs. Harrison's youngest son. In another minute she was
off, retailing a long history in which Johnnie's adenoids and tonsils
bulked largely. Katherine listened sympathetically. Habits die hard.
Listening had been her portion for ten years now. "My dear, I wonder if
I ever told you about that naval ball at Portsmouth? When Lord Charles
admired my gown?" And composedly, kindly, Katherine would reply: "I
rather think you have, Mrs. Harfield, but I've forgotten about it.
Won't you tell it me again?" And then the old lady would start off
full swing, with numerous details. And half of Katherine's mind would
be listening, saying the right things mechanically when the old lady
paused....

Now, with that same curious feeling of duality to which she was
accustomed, she listened to Mrs. Harrison.

At the end of half an hour, the latter recalled herself suddenly.

"I've been talking about myself all this time," she exclaimed. "And I
came here to talk about you and your plans."

"I don't know that I've got any yet."

"My dear--you're not going to stay on _here_."

Katherine smiled at the horror in the other's tone.

"No; I think I want to travel. I've never seen much of the world, you
know."

"I should think not. It must have been an awful life for you cooped up
here all these years."

"I don't know," said Katherine. "It gave me a lot of freedom."

She caught the other's gasp, and reddened a little.

"It must sound foolish--saying that. Of course, I hadn't much freedom
in the downright physical sense--"

"I should think not," breathed Mrs. Harrison, remembering that
Katherine had seldom had that useful thing--a "day off."

"But, in a way, being tied physically gives you lots of scope mentally.
You're always free to think. I've had a lovely feeling always of mental
freedom."

Mrs. Harrison shook her head.

"I can't understand that."

"Oh! you would if you'd been in my place. But, all the same, I feel
I want a change. I want--well, I want things to happen. Oh! not to
me--I don't mean that. But to be in the midst of things, exciting
things--even if I'm only the looker-on. You know, things don't happen
in St. Mary Mead."

"They don't indeed," said Mrs. Harrison, with fervour.

"I shall go to London first," said Katherine. "I have to see the
solicitors, anyway. After that, I shall go abroad, I think."

"Very nice."

"But, of course, first of all--"

"Yes?"

"I must get some clothes."

"Exactly what I said to Arthur this morning," cried the doctor's wife.
"You know, Katherine, you could look positively beautiful if you tried."

Miss Grey laughed unaffectedly.

"Oh! I don't think you could ever make a beauty out of me," she said
sincerely. "But I shall enjoy having some really good clothes. I'm
afraid I'm talking about myself an awful lot."

Mrs. Harrison looked at her shrewdly.

"It must be quite a novel experience for you," she said drily.

Katherine went to say good-bye to old Miss Viner before leaving the
village. Miss Viner was two years older than Mrs. Harfield, and her
mind was mainly taken with her own success in outliving her dead friend.

"You wouldn't have thought I'd have outlasted Jane Harfield, would
you?" she demanded triumphantly of Katherine. "We were at school
together, she and I. And here we are, she taken, and I left. Who would
have thought it?"

"You've always eaten brown bread for supper, haven't you?" murmured
Katherine mechanically.

"Fancy your remembering that, my dear. Yes; if Jane Harfield had had a
slice of brown bread every evening and taken a little stimulant with
her meals she might be here to-day."

The old lady paused, nodding her head triumphantly, then added in
sudden remembrance:

"And so you've come into a lot of money, I hear? Well, well. Take care
of it. And you're going up to London to have a good time? Don't think
you'll get married, though, my dear, because you won't. You're not the
kind to attract the men. And, besides, you're getting on. How old are
you now?"

"Thirty-three," Katherine told her.

"Well," remarked Miss Viner doubtfully, "that's not so very bad. You've
lost your first freshness, of course."

"I'm afraid so," said Katherine, much entertained.

"But you're a very nice girl," said Miss Viner kindly. "And I'm sure
there's many a man might do worse than take you for a wife instead of
one of these flibbertigibbets running about nowadays showing more of
their legs than the Creator ever intended them to. Good-bye, my dear,
and I hope you'll enjoy yourself, but things are seldom what they seem
in this life."

Heartened by these prophecies, Katherine took her departure. Half the
village came to see her off at the station, including the little maid
of all work, Alice, who brought a stiff wired nosegay and cried openly.

"There ain't a many like her," sobbed Alice when the train had finally
departed. "I'm sure when Charlie went back on me with that girl from
the Dairy, nobody could have been kinder than Miss Grey was, and though
particular about the brasses and the dust, she was always one to notice
when you'd give a thing an extra rub. Cut myself in little pieces for
her, I would, any day. A real lady, that's what I call her."

Such was Katherine's departure from St. Mary Mead.




                    8. Lady Tamplin Writes a Letter


"Well," said Lady Tamplin, "well."

She laid down the continental _Daily Mail_ and stared out across the
blue waters of the Mediterranean. A branch of golden mimosa, hanging
just above her head, made an effective frame for a very charming
picture. A golden-haired, blue-eyed lady in a very becoming negligee.
That the golden hair owed something to art, as did the pink-and-white
complexion, was undeniable, but the blue of the eyes was Nature's gift,
and at forty-four Lady Tamplin could still rank as a beauty.

Charming as she looked, Lady Tamplin was, for once, not thinking of
herself. That is to say, she was not thinking of her appearance. She
was intent on graver matters.

Lady Tamplin was a well-known figure on the Riviera, and her parties
at the Villa Marguerite were justly celebrated. She was a woman of
considerable experience, and had had four husbands. The first had been
merely an indiscretion, and so was seldom referred to by the lady. He
had had the good sense to die with commendable promptitude, and his
widow thereupon espoused a rich manufacturer of buttons. He too had
departed for another sphere after three years of married life--it was
said after a congenial evening with some boon companions. After him
came Viscount Tamplin, who had placed Rosalie securely on those heights
where she wished to tread. She had retained her title when she married
for a fourth time. This fourth venture had been undertaken for pure
pleasure. Mr. Charles Evans, an extremely good-looking young man of
twenty-seven, with delightful manners, a keen love of sport, and an
appreciation of this world's goods, had no money of his own whatsoever.

Lady Tamplin was very pleased and satisfied with life generally,
but she had occasional faint preoccupations about money. The button
manufacturer had left his widow a considerable fortune, but, as Lady
Tamplin was wont to say, "what with one thing and another--" (one thing
being the depreciation of stocks owing to the War, and the other the
extravagances of the late Lord Tamplin). She was still comfortably
off. But to be merely comfortably off is hardly satisfactory to one of
Rosalie Tamplin's temperament.

So, on this particular January morning, she opened her blue eyes
extremely wide as she read a certain item of news and uttered that
non-committal monosyllable "Well." The only other occupant of the
balcony was her daughter, the Hon. Lenox Tamplin. A daughter such as
Lenox was a sad thorn in Lady Tamplin's side, a girl with no kind
of tact, who actually looked older than her age, and whose peculiar
sardonic form of humour was, to say the least of it, uncomfortable.

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "just fancy."

"What is it?"

Lady Tamplin picked up the _Daily Mail_, handed it to her daughter, and
indicated with an agitated fore finger the paragraph of interest.

Lenox read it without any of the signs of agitation shown by her
mother. She handed back the paper.

"What about it?" she asked. "It is the sort of thing that is always
happening. Cheese-paring old women are always dying in villages and
leaving fortunes of millions to their humble companions."

"Yes, dear, I know," said her mother, "and I dare say the fortune
is not anything like as large as they say it is; newspapers are so
inaccurate. But even if you cut it down by half--"

"Well," said Lenox, "it has not been left to us."

"Not exactly, dear," said Lady Tamplin; "but this girl, this Katherine
Grey, is actually a cousin of mine. One of the Worcestershire Greys,
the Edgeworth lot. My very own cousin! Fancy!"

"Ah-ha," said Lenox.

"And I was wondering--" said her mother.

"What there was in it for us," finished Lenox, with that sideways smile
that her mother always found difficult to understand.

"Oh, darling," said Lady Tamplin, on a faint note of reproach.

It was very faint, because Rosalie Tamplin was used to her daughter's
outspokenness and to what she called Lenox's uncomfortable way of
putting things.

"I was wondering," said Lady Tamplin, again drawing her artistically
pencilled brows together, "whether--oh, good morning, Chubby darling;
are you going to play tennis? How nice!"

Chubby, thus addressed, smiled kindly at her, remarked perfunctorily,
"How topping you look in that peach-coloured thing," and drifted past
them and down the steps.

"The dear thing," said Lady Tamplin, looking affectionately after her
husband. "Let me see, what was I saying? Ah!" She switched her mind
back to business once more. "I was wondering--"

"Oh, for God's sake get on with it. That is the third time you have
said that."

"Well, dear," said Lady Tamplin, "I was thinking that it would be very
nice if I wrote to dear Katherine and suggested that she should pay
us a little visit out here. Naturally, she is quite out of touch with
Society. It would be nicer for her to be launched by one of her own
people. An advantage for her and an advantage for us."

"How much do you think you would get her to cough up?" asked Lenox.

Her mother looked at her reproachfully and murmured:

"We should have to come to some financial arrangement, of course. What
with one thing and another--the War--your poor father--"

"And Chubby now," said Lenox. "He is an expensive luxury if you like."

"She was a nice girl as I remember her," murmured Lady Tamplin,
pursuing her own line of thought--"quiet, never wanted to shove herself
forward, not a beauty, and never a man-hunter."

"She will leave Chubby alone, then?" said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin looked at her in protest. "Chubby would never--" she began.

"No," said Lenox, "I don't believe he would; he knows a jolly sight too
well which way his bread is buttered."

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "you have such a coarse way of putting
things."

"Sorry," said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin gathered up the _Daily Mail_ and her negligee, a
vanity-bag, and various odd letters.

"I shall write to dear Katherine at once," she said, "and remind her of
the dear old days at Edgeworth."

She went into the house, a light of purpose shining in her eyes.

Unlike Mrs. Samuel Harfield, correspondence flowed easily from her pen.
She covered four sheets without pause or effort, and on re-reading it
found no occasion to alter a word.

Katherine received it on the morning of her arrival in London. Whether
she read between the lines of it or not is another matter. She put it
in her handbag and started out to keep the appointment she had made
with Mrs. Harfield's lawyers.

The firm was an old-established one in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and
after a few minutes' delay Katherine was shown into the presence of
the senior partner, a kindly, elderly man with shrewd blue eyes and a
fatherly manner.

They discussed Mrs. Harfield's will and various legal matters for some
minutes, then Katherine handed the lawyer Mrs. Samuel's letter.

"I had better show you this, I suppose," she said, "though it is really
rather ridiculous."

He read it with a slight smile.

"Rather a crude attempt, Miss Grey. I need hardly tell you, I suppose,
that these people have no claim of any kind upon the estate, and if
they endeavour to contest the will no court will uphold them."

"I thought as much."

"Human nature is not always very wise. In Mrs. Samuel Harfield's place,
I should have been more inclined to make an appeal to your generosity."

"That is one of the things I wanted to speak to you about. I should
like a certain sum to go to these people."

"There is no obligation."

"I know that."

"And they will not take it in the spirit it is meant. They will
probably regard it as an attempt to pay them off, though they will not
refuse it on that account."

"I can see that, and it can't be helped."

"I should advise you, Miss Grey, to put that idea out of your head."

Katherine shook her head. "You are quite right, I know, but I should
like it done all the same."

"They will grab at the money and abuse you all the more afterwards."

"Well," said Katherine, "let them if they like. We all have our own
ways of enjoying ourselves. They were, after all, Mrs. Harfield's only
relatives, and though they despised her as a poor relation and paid no
attention to her when she was alive, it seems to me unfair that they
should be cut off with nothing."

She carried her point, though the lawyer was still unwilling, and
she presently went out into the streets of London with a comfortable
assurance that she could spend money freely and make what plans she
liked for the future. Her first action was to visit the establishment
of a famous dressmaker.

A slim, elderly Frenchwoman, rather like a dreaming duchess, received
her, and Katherine spoke with a certain _naïveté_.

"I want, if I may, to put myself in your hands. I have been very poor
all my life and know nothing about clothes, but now I have come into
some money and want to look really well dressed."

The Frenchwoman was charmed. She had an artist's temperament, which
had been soured earlier in the morning by a visit from an Argentine
meat queen, who had insisted on having those models least suited to
her flamboyant type of beauty. She scrutinized Katherine with keen,
clever eyes. "Yes--yes, it will be a pleasure. Mademoiselle has a
very good figure; for her the simple lines will be best. She is also
_très anglaise_. Some people it would offend them if I said that,
but Mademoiselle, no. _Une belle Anglaise_, there is no style more
delightful."

The demeanour of a dreaming duchess was suddenly put off. She screamed
out directions to various mannequins. "Clothilde, Virginie, quickly, my
little ones, the little _tailleur gris clair_ and the _robe de soirée_
'_soupir d'automne_.' Marcelle, my child, the little mimosa suit of
crêpe de chine."

It was a charming morning. Marcelle, Clothilde, Virginie, bored
and scornful, passed slowly round, squirming and wriggling in the
time-honoured fashion of mannequins. The Duchess stood by Katherine and
made entries in a small notebook.

"An excellent choice, Mademoiselle. Mademoiselle has great _goût_. Yes,
indeed. Mademoiselle cannot do better than those little suits if she is
going to the Riviera, as I suppose, this winter."

"Let me see that evening dress once more," said Katherine--"the pinky
mauve one."

Virginie appeared, circling slowly.

"That is the prettiest of all," said Katherine, as she surveyed the
exquisite draperies of mauve and grey and blue. "What do you call it?"

"_Soupir d'automne_; yes, yes, that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle."

What was there in these words that came back to Katherine with a faint
feeling of sadness after she had left the dressmaking establishment?

"'_Soupir d'automne; that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle._'"
Autumn, yes, it was autumn for her. She who had never known spring or
summer, and would never know them now. Something she had lost never
could be given to her again. These years of servitude in St. Mary
Mead--and all the while life passing by.

"I am an idiot," said Katherine. "I am an idiot. What do I want? Why, I
was more contented a month ago than I am now."

She drew out from her handbag the letter she had received that morning
from Lady Tamplin. Katherine was no fool. She understood the _nuances_
of that letter as well as anybody and the reason of Lady Tamplin's
sudden show of affection towards a long-forgotten cousin was not lost
upon her. It was for profit and not for pleasure that Lady Tamplin was
so anxious for the company of her dear cousin. Well, why not? There
would be profit on both sides.

"I will go," said Katherine.

She was walking down Piccadilly at the moment, and turned into Cook's
to clinch the matter then and there. She had to wait for a few minutes.
The man with whom the clerk was engaged was also going to the Riviera.
Every one, she felt, was going. Well, for the first time in her life,
she, too, would be doing what "everybody did."

The man in front of her turned abruptly, and she stepped into his
place. She made her demand to the clerk, but at the same time half of
her mind was busy with something else. That man's face--in some vague
way it was familiar to her. Where had she seen him before? Suddenly
she remembered. It was in the Savoy outside her room that morning.
She had collided with him in the passage. Rather an odd coincidence
that she should run into him twice in a day. She glanced over her
shoulder, rendered uneasy by something, she knew not what. The man was
standing in the doorway looking back at her. A cold shiver passed over
Katherine; she had a haunting sense of tragedy, of doom impending....

Then she shook the impression from her with her usual good sense and
turned her whole attention to what the clerk was saying.




                          9. An Offer Refused


It was rarely that Derek Kettering allowed his temper to get the better
of him. An easy-going insouciance was his chief characteristic, and it
had stood him in good stead in more than one tight corner. Even now, by
the time he had left Mirelle's flat, he had cooled down. He had need of
coolness. The corner he was in now was a tighter one than he had ever
been in before, and unforeseen factors had arisen with which, for the
moment, he did not know how to deal.

He strolled along deep in thought. His brow was furrowed, and there was
none of the easy, jaunty manner which sat so well upon him. Various
possibilities floated through his mind. It might have been said of
Derek Kettering that he was less of a fool than he looked. He saw
several roads that he might take--one in particular. If he shrank
from it, it was for the moment only. Desperate ills need desperate
remedies. He had gauged his father-in-law correctly. A war between
Derek Kettering and Rufus Van Aldin could end only one way. Derek
damned money and the power of money vehemently to himself. He walked
up St. James's Street, across Piccadilly, and strolled along it in the
direction of Piccadilly Circus. As he passed the offices of Messrs.
Thomas Cook & Sons his footsteps slackened. He walked on, however,
still turning the matter over in his mind. Finally, he gave a brief nod
of his head, turned sharply--so sharply as to collide with a couple of
pedestrians who were following in his footsteps, and went back the way
he had come. This time he did not pass Cook's, but went in. The office
was comparatively empty, and he got attended to at once.

"I want to go to Nice next week. Will you give me particulars?"

"What date, sir?"

"The 14th. What is the best train?"

"Well, of course, _the_ best train is what they call the 'Blue Train.'
You avoid the tiresome Customs business at Calais."

Derek nodded. He knew all this, none better.

"The 14th," murmured the clerk; "that is rather soon. The Blue Train is
nearly always all booked up."

"See if there is a berth left," said Derek. "If there is not--" He left
the sentence unfinished, with a curious smile on his face.

The clerk disappeared for a few minutes, and presently returned.

"That is all right, sir; still three berths left. I will book you one
of them. What name?"

"Pavett," said Derek. He gave the address of his rooms in Jermyn Street.

The clerk nodded, finished writing it down, wished Derek good morning
politely, and turned his attention to the next client.

"I want to go to Nice--on the 14th. Isn't there a train called the Blue
Train?"

Derek looked round sharply.

Coincidence--a strange coincidence. He remembered his own
half-whimsical words to Mirelle, "_Portrait of a lady with grey eyes.
I don't suppose I shall ever see her again._" But he _had_ seen her
again, and, what was more, she proposed to travel to the Riviera on the
same day as he did.

Just for a moment a shiver passed over him; in some ways he was
superstitious. He had said, half-laughingly, that this woman might
bring him bad luck. Suppose--suppose that should prove to be true. From
the doorway he looked back at her as she stood talking to the clerk.
For once his memory had not played him false. A lady--a lady in every
sense of the word. Not very young, not singularly beautiful. But with
something--grey eyes that might perhaps see too much. He knew as he
went out of the door that in some way he was afraid of this woman. He
had a sense of fatality.

He went back to his rooms in Jermyn Street and summoned his man.

"Take this cheque, Pavett, cash it first thing in the morning, and
go around to Cook's in Piccadilly. They will have some tickets there
booked in your name, pay for them, and bring them back."

"Very good, sir."

Pavett withdrew.

Derek strolled over to a side-table and picked up a handful of letters.
They were of a type only too familiar. Bills, small bills and large
bills, one and all pressing for payment. The tone of the demands was
still polite. Derek knew how soon that polite tone would change if--if
certain news became public property.

He flung himself moodily into a large, leather-covered chair. A damned
hole--that was what he was in. Yes, a damned hole! And ways of getting
out of that damned hole were not too promising.

Pavett appeared with a discreet cough.

"A gentleman to see you--sir--Major Knighton."

"Knighton, eh?"

Derek sat up, frowned, became suddenly alert. He said in a softer tone,
almost to himself: "Knighton--I wonder what is in the wind now?"

"Shall I--er--show him in, sir?"

His master nodded. When Knighton entered the room he found a charming
and genial host awaiting him.

"Very good of you to look me up," said Derek.

Knighton was nervous.

The other's keen eyes noticed that at once. The errand on which the
secretary had come was clearly distasteful to him. He replied almost
mechanically to Derek's easy flow of conversation. He declined a drink,
and, if anything, his manner became stiffer than before. Derek appeared
at last to notice it.

"Well," he said cheerfully, "what does my esteemed father-in-law want
with me? You have come on his business, I take it?"

Knighton did not smile in reply.

"I have, yes," he said carefully. "I--I wish Mr. Van Aldin had chosen
some one else."

Derek raised his eyebrows in mock dismay.

"Is it as bad as all that? I am not very thin skinned, I can assure
you, Knighton."

"No," said Knighton; "but this--"

He paused.

Derek eyed him keenly.

"Go on, out with it," he said kindly. "I can imagine my dear
father-in-law's errands might not always be pleasant ones."

Knighton cleared his throat. He spoke formally in tones that he strove
to render free of embarrassment.

"I am directed by Mr. Van Aldin to make you a definite offer."

"An offer?" For a moment Derek showed his surprise. Knighton's opening
words were clearly not what he had expected. He offered a cigarette to
Knighton, lit one himself, and sank back in his chair, murmuring in a
slightly sardonic voice:

"An offer? That sounds rather interesting."

"Shall I go on?"

"Please. You must forgive my surprise, but it seems to me that my dear
father-in-law has rather climbed down since our chat this morning. And
climbing down is not what one associates with strong men, Napoleons of
finance, etc. It shows--I think it shows that he finds his position
weaker than he thought it."

Knighton listened politely to the easy, mocking voice, but no sign of
any kind showed itself on his rather stolid countenance. He waited
until Derek had finished, and then he said quietly:

"I will state the proposition in the fewest possible words."

"Go on."

Knighton did not look at the other. His voice was curt and
matter-of-fact.

"The matter is simply this. Mrs. Kettering, as you know, is about to
file a petition for divorce. If the case goes undefended you will
receive one hundred thousand on the day that the decree is made
absolute."

Derek, in the act of lighting his cigarette, suddenly stopped dead.

"A hundred thousand!" he said sharply. "Dollars?"

"Pounds."

There was dead silence for at least two minutes. Kettering had his
brows together thinking. A hundred thousand pounds. It meant Mirelle
and a continuance of his pleasant, carefree life. It meant that Van
Aldin knew something. Van Aldin did not pay for nothing. He got up and
stood by the chimney-piece.

"And in the event of my refusing his handsome offer?" he asked, with a
cold, ironical politeness.

Knighton made a deprecating gesture.

"I can assure you, Mr. Kettering," he said earnestly, "that it is with
the utmost unwillingness that I came here with this message."

"That's all right," said Kettering. "Don't distress yourself; it's not
your fault. Now then--I asked you a question, will you answer it?"

Knighton also rose. He spoke more reluctantly than before.

"In the event of your refusing this proposition," he said, "Mr. Van
Aldin wished me to tell you in plain words that he proposes to break
you. Just that."

Kettering raised his eyebrows, but he retained his light, amused manner.

"Well, well!" he said, "I suppose he can do it. I certainly should not
be able to put up much of a fight against America's man of millions. A
hundred thousand! If you are going to bribe a man there is nothing like
doing it thoroughly. Supposing I were to tell you that for two hundred
thousand I'd do what he wanted, what then?"

"I would take your message back to Mr. Van Aldin," said Knighton
unemotionally. "Is that your answer?"

"No," said Derek; "funnily enough it is not. You can go back to my
father-in-law and tell him to take himself and his bribes to hell. Is
that clear?"

"Perfectly," said Knighton. He got up, hesitated, and then flushed.
"I--you will allow me to say, Mr. Kettering, that I am glad you have
answered as you have."

Derek did not reply. When the other had left the room he remained for a
minute or two lost in thought. A curious smile came to his lips.

"And that is that," he said softly.




                         10. On the Blue Train


"Dad!"

Mrs. Kettering started violently. Her nerves were not completely under
control this morning. Very perfectly dressed in a long mink coat and
a little hat of Chinese lacquer red, she had been walking along the
crowded platform of Victoria deep in thought, and her father's sudden
appearance and hearty greeting had an unlooked-for effect upon her.

"Why, Ruth, how you jumped!"

"I didn't expect to see you, I suppose, Dad. You said good-bye to me
last night and said you had a conference this morning."

"So I have," said Van Aldin, "but you are more to me than any number of
darned conferences. I came to take a last look at you, since I am not
going to see you for some time."

"That is very sweet of you, Dad. I wish you were coming too."

"What would you say if I did?"

The remark was merely a joking one. He was surprised to see the quick
colour flame in Ruth's cheeks. For a moment he almost thought he saw
dismay flash out of her eyes. She laughed uncertainly and nervously.

"Just for a moment I really thought you meant it," she said.

"Would you have been pleased?"

"Of course." She spoke with exaggerated emphasis.

"Well," said Van Aldin, "that's good."

"It isn't really for very long, Dad," continued Ruth; "you know, you
are coming out next month."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin unemotionally, "sometimes I guess I will go to one
of these big guys in Harley Street and have him tell me that I need
sunshine and change of air right away."

"Don't be so lazy," cried Ruth; "next month is ever so much nicer
than this month out there. You have got all sorts of things you can't
possibly leave just now."

"Well, that's so, I suppose," said Van Aldin, with a sigh. "You had
better be getting on board this train of yours, Ruth. Where is your
seat?"

Ruth Kettering looked vaguely up at the train. At the door of one of
the Pullman cars a thin, tall woman dressed in black was standing--Ruth
Kettering's maid. She drew aside as her mistress came up to her.

"I have put your dressing-case under your seat, Madam, in case you
should need it. Shall I take the rugs, or will you require one?"

"No, no, I shan't want one. Better go and find your own seat now,
Mason."

"Yes, Madam."

The maid departed.

Van Aldin entered the Pullman car with Ruth. She found her seat, and
Van Aldin deposited various papers and magazines on the table in front
of her. The seat opposite to her was already taken, and the American
gave a cursory glance at its occupant. He had a fleeting impression of
attractive grey eyes and a neat travelling costume. He indulged in a
little more desultory conversation with Ruth, the kind of talk peculiar
to those seeing other people off by train.

Presently, as whistles blew, he glanced at his watch.

"I had best be clearing out of here. Good-bye, my dear. Don't worry, I
will attend to things."

"Oh, father!"

He turned back sharply. There had been something in Ruth's voice,
something so entirely foreign to her usual manner, that he was
startled. It was almost a cry of despair. She had made an impulsive
movement towards him, but in another minute she was mistress of herself
once more.

"Till next month," she said cheerfully.

Two minutes later the train started.

Ruth sat very still, biting her under lip and trying hard to keep the
unaccustomed tears from her eyes. She felt a sudden sense of horrible
desolation. There was a wild longing upon her to jump out of the train
and to go back before it was too late. She, so calm, so self-assured,
for the first time in her life felt like a leaf swept by the wind. If
her father knew--what would he say?

Madness! Yes, just that, madness! For the first time in her life she
was swept away by emotion, swept away to the point of doing a thing
which even she knew to be incredibly foolish and reckless. She was
enough Van Aldin's daughter to realize her own folly, and level headed
enough to condemn her own action. But she was his daughter in another
sense also. She had that same iron determination that would have what
it wanted, and once it had made up its mind would not be balked. From
her cradle she had been self-willed; the very circumstances of her life
had developed that self-will in her. It drove her now remorselessly.
Well, the die was cast. She must go through with it now.

She looked up, and her eyes met those of the woman sitting opposite.
She had a sudden fancy that in some way this other woman had read her
mind. She saw in those grey eyes understanding and--yes--compassion.

It was only a fleeting impression. The faces of both women hardened
to well-bred impassiveness. Mrs. Kettering took up a magazine, and
Katherine Grey looked out of the window and watched a seemingly endless
vista of depressing streets and suburban houses.

Ruth found an increasing difficulty in fixing her mind on the printed
page in front of her. In spite of herself, a thousand apprehensions
preyed on her mind. What a fool she had been! What a fool she was! Like
all cool and self-sufficient people, when she did lose her self-control
she lost it thoroughly. It was too late.... Was it too late? Oh, for
some one to speak to, for some one to advise her. She had never before
had such a wish; she would have scorned the idea of relying on any
judgment other than her own, but now--what was the matter with her?
Panic. Yes, that would describe it best--panic. She, Ruth Kettering,
was completely and utterly panic stricken.

She stole a covert glance at the figure opposite. If only she knew some
one like that, some nice, cool, calm, sympathetic creature. That was
the sort of person one could talk to. But you can't, of course, confide
in a stranger. And Ruth smiled to herself a little at the idea. She
picked up the magazine again. Really she must control herself. After
all, she had thought all this out. She had decided of her own free
will. What happiness had she ever had in her life up to now? She said
to herself restlessly: "Why shouldn't I be happy? No one will ever
know."

It seemed no time before Dover was reached. Ruth was a good sailor. She
disliked the cold, and was glad to reach the shelter of the private
cabin she had telegraphed for. Although she would not have admitted
the fact, Ruth was in some ways superstitious. She was of the order of
people to whom coincidence appeals. After disembarking at Calais and
settling herself down with her maid in her double compartment in the
Blue Train, she went along to the luncheon car. It was with a little
shock of surprise that she found herself set down to a small table
with, opposite her, the same woman who had been her _vis-à-vis_ in the
Pullman. A faint smile came to the lips of both women.

"This is quite a coincidence," said Mrs. Kettering.

"I know," said Katherine; "it is odd the way things happen."

A flying attendant shot up to them with the wonderful velocity always
displayed by the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits and deposited
two cups of soup. By the time the omelette succeeded the soup they
were chatting together in friendly fashion.

"It will be heavenly to get into the sunshine," sighed Ruth.

"I am sure it will be a wonderful feeling."

"You know the Riviera well?"

"No; this is my first visit."

"Fancy that."

"You go every year, I expect?"

"Practically. January and February in London are horrible."

"I have always lived in the country. They are not very inspiring months
there either. Mostly mud."

"What made you suddenly decide to travel?"

"Money," said Katherine. "For ten years I have been a paid companion
with just enough money of my own to buy myself strong country shoes;
now I have been left what seems to me a fortune, though I dare say it
would not seem so to you."

"Now I wonder why you say that--that it would not seem so to me."

Katherine laughed. "I don't really know. I suppose one forms
impressions without thinking of it. I put you down in my own mind as
one of the very rich of the earth. It was just an impression. I dare
say I am wrong."

"No," said Ruth, "you are not wrong." She had suddenly become very
grave. "I wish you would tell me what other impressions you formed
about me?"

"I--"

Ruth swept on disregarding the other's embarrassment.

"Oh, please, don't be conventional. I want to know. As we left Victoria
I looked across at you, and I had the sort of feeling that you--well,
understood what was going on in my mind."

"I can assure you I am not a mind reader," said Katherine, smiling.

"No; but will you tell me, please, just what you thought." Ruth's
eagerness was so intense and so sincere that she carried her point.

"I will tell you if you like, but you must not think me impertinent. I
thought that for some reason you were in great distress of mind, and I
was sorry for you."

"You are right. You are quite right. I am in terrible trouble. I--I
should like to tell you something about it, if I may."

"Oh, dear," Katherine thought to herself, "how extraordinarily alike
the world seems to be everywhere! People were always telling me things
in St. Mary Mead, and it is just the same thing here, and I don't
really want to hear anybody's troubles!"

She replied politely:

"Do tell me."

They were just finishing their lunch. Ruth gulped down her coffee, rose
from her seat, and quite oblivious of the fact that Katherine had not
begun to sip her coffee, said: "Come to my compartment with me."

They were two single compartments with a communicating door between
them. In the second of them a thin maid, whom Katherine had noticed at
Victoria, was sitting very upright on the seat, clutching a big scarlet
morocco case with the initials R. V. K. on it. Mrs. Kettering pulled
the communicating door to and sank down on the seat. Katherine sat down
beside her.

"I am in trouble and I don't know what to do. There is a man whom I
am fond of--very fond of indeed. We cared for each other when we were
young, and we were thrust apart most brutally and unjustly. Now we have
come together again."

"Yes?"

"I--I am going to meet him now. Oh! I dare say you think it is all
wrong, but you don't know the circumstances. My husband is impossible.
He has treated me disgracefully."

"Yes," said Katherine again.

"What I feel so badly about is this. I have deceived my father--it was
he who came to see me off at Victoria to-day. He wishes me to divorce
my husband, and, of course, he has no idea--that I am going to meet
this other man. He would think it extraordinarily foolish."

"Well, don't you think it is?"

"I--I suppose it is."

Ruth Kettering looked down at her hands; they were shaking violently.

"But I can't draw back now."

"Why not?"

"I--it is all arranged, and it would break his heart."

"Don't you believe it," said Katherine robustly; "hearts are pretty
tough."

"He will think I have no courage, no strength of purpose."

"It seems to me an awfully silly thing that you are going to do," said
Katherine. "I think you realize that yourself."

Ruth Kettering buried her face in her hands. "I don't know--I don't
know. Ever since I left Victoria I have had a horrible feeling of
something--something that is coming to me very soon--that I can't
escape."

She clutched convulsively at Katherine's hand.

"You must think I am mad talking to you like this, but I tell you I
know something horrible is going to happen."

"Don't think it," said Katherine; "try to pull yourself together. You
could send your father a wire from Paris, if you like, and he would
come to you at once."

The other brightened.

"Yes, I could do that. Dear old Dad. It is queer--but I never knew
until to-day how terribly fond of him I am." She sat up and dried her
eyes with a handkerchief. "I have been very foolish. Thank you so much
for letting me talk to you. I don't know why I got into such a queer,
hysterical state."

She got up. "I am quite all right now. I suppose, really, I just needed
some one to talk to. I can't think now why I have been making such an
absolute fool of myself."

Katherine got up too.

"I am so glad you feel better," she said, trying to make her voice
sound as conventional as possible. She was only too well aware that the
aftermath of confidences is embarrassment. She added tactfully:

"I must be going back to my own compartment."

She emerged into the corridor at the same time as the maid was also
coming out from the next door. The latter looked towards Katherine,
over her shoulder, and an expression of intense surprise showed itself
on her face. Katherine turned also, but by that time whoever it was
who had aroused the maid's interest had retreated into his or her
compartment, and the corridor was empty. Katherine walked down it to
regain her own place, which was in the next coach. As she passed the
end compartment the door opened and a woman's face looked out for a
moment and then pulled the door to sharply. It was a face not easily
forgotten, as Katherine was to know when she saw it again. A beautiful
face, oval and dark, very heavily made up in a bizarre fashion.
Katherine had a feeling that she had seen it before somewhere.

She regained her own compartment without other adventure and sat for
some time thinking of the confidence which had just been made to her.
She wondered idly who the woman in the mink coat might be, wondered
also how the end of her story would turn out.

"If I have stopped any one from making an idiot of themselves, I
suppose I have done good work," she thought to herself. "But who knows?
That is the kind of woman who is hard-headed and egotistical all her
life, and it might be good for her to do the other sort of thing for
a change. Oh, well--I don't suppose I shall ever see her again. She
certainly won't want to see _me_ again. That is the worst of letting
people tell you things. They never do."

She hoped that she would not be given the same place at dinner. She
reflected, not without humour, that it might be awkward for both of
them. Leaning back with her head against a cushion she felt tired
and vaguely depressed. They had reached Paris, and the slow journey
round the _ceinture_, with its interminable stops and waits, was very
wearisome. When they arrived at the Gare de Lyon she was glad to get
out and walk up and down the platform. The keen cold air was refreshing
after the steam-heated train. She observed with a smile that her
friend of the mink coat was solving the possible awkwardness of the
dinner problem in her own way. A dinner basket was being handed up and
received through the window by the maid.

When the train started once more, and dinner was announced by a violent
ringing of bells, Katherine went along to it much relieved in mind. Her
_vis-à-vis_ to-night was of an entirely different kind--a small man,
distinctly foreign in appearance, with a rigidly waxed moustache and
an egg-shaped head which he carried rather on one side. Katherine had
taken in a book to dinner with her. She found the little man's eyes
fixed upon it with a kind of twinkling amusement.

"I see, Madame, that you have a _roman policier_. You are fond of such
things?"

"They amuse me," Katherine admitted.

The little man nodded with the air of complete understanding.

"They have a good sale always, so I am told. Now why is that, eh,
Mademoiselle? I ask it of you as a student of human nature--why should
that be?"

Katherine felt more and more amused.

"Perhaps they give one the illusion of living an exciting life," she
suggested.

He nodded gravely.

"Yes; there is something in that."

"Of course, one knows that such things don't really happen," Katherine
was continuing, but he interrupted her sharply.

"Sometimes, Mademoiselle! Sometimes! I who speak to you--they have
happened to _me_."

She threw him a quick, interested glance.

"Some day, who knows, _you_ might be in the thick of things," he went
on. "It is all chance."

"I don't think it is likely," said Katherine. "Nothing of that kind
ever happens to me."

He leaned forward.

"Would you like it to?"

The question startled her, and she drew in her breath sharply.

"It is my fancy, perhaps," said the little man, as he dexterously
polished one of the forks, "but I think that you have a yearning in you
for interesting happenings. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, all through my
life I have observed one thing--'All one wants one gets!' Who knows?"
His face screwed itself up comically. "You may get more than you
bargain for."

"Is that a prophecy?" asked Katherine, smiling as she rose from the
table.

The little man shook his head.

"I never prophesy," he declared pompously. "It is true that I have the
habit of being always right--but I do not boast of it. Good-night,
Mademoiselle, and may you sleep well."

Katherine went back along the train amused and entertained by her
little neighbour. She passed the open door of her friend's compartment
and saw the conductor making up the bed. The lady in the mink coat
was standing looking out of the window. The second compartment, as
Katherine saw through the communicating door, was empty, with rugs and
bags heaped up on the seat. The maid was not there.

Katherine found her own bed prepared, and since she was tired, she went
to bed and switched off her light about half-past nine.

She woke with a sudden start; how much time had passed she did not
know. Glancing at her watch, she found that it had stopped. A feeling
of intense uneasiness pervaded her and grew stronger moment by moment.
At last she got up, threw her dressing-gown round her shoulders, and
stepped out into the corridor. The whole train seemed wrapped in
slumber. Katherine let down the window and sat by it for some minutes,
drinking in the cool night air and trying vainly to calm her uneasy
fears. She presently decided that she would go along to the end and ask
the conductor for the right time so that she could set her watch. She
found, however, that his little chair was vacant. She hesitated for a
moment and then walked through into the next coach. She looked down
the long, dim line of the corridor and saw, to her surprise, that a
man was standing with his hand on the door of the compartment occupied
by the lady in the mink coat. That is to say, she thought it was the
compartment. Probably, however, she was mistaken. He stood there for a
moment or two with his back to her, seeming uncertain and hesitating
in his attitude. Then he slowly turned, and with an odd feeling of
fatality, Katherine recognized him as the same man whom she had noticed
twice before--once in the corridor of the Savoy hotel and once in
Cook's offices. Then he opened the door of the compartment and passed
in, drawing it to behind him.

An idea flashed across Katherine's mind. Could this be the man of whom
the other woman had spoken--the man she was journeying to meet.

Then Katherine told herself that she was romancing. In all probability
she had mistaken the compartment.

She went back to her own carriage. Five minutes later the train
slackened speed. There was the long plaintive hiss of the Westinghouse
brake, and a few minutes later the train came to a stop at Lyons.




                              11. Murder


Katherine wakened the next morning to brilliant sunshine. She went
along to breakfast early, but met none of her acquaintances of the day
before. When she returned to her compartment it had just been restored
to its day-time appearance by the conductor, a dark man with a drooping
moustache and melancholy face.

"Madame is fortunate," he said; "the sun shines. It is always a great
disappointment to passengers when they arrive on a grey morning."

"I should have been disappointed, certainly," said Katherine.

The man prepared to depart.

"We are rather late, Madame," he said. "I will let you know just before
we get to Nice."

Katherine nodded. She sat by the window, entranced by the sunlit
panorama. The palm trees, the deep blue of the sea, the bright yellow
mimosa came with all the charm of novelty to the woman who for
fourteen years had known only the drab winters of England.

When they arrived at Cannes, Katherine got out and walked up and down
the platform. She was curious about the lady in the mink coat, and
looked up at the windows of her compartment. The blinds were still
drawn down--the only ones to be so on the whole train. Katherine
wondered a little, and when she re-entered the train she passed along
the corridor and noticed that these two compartments were still
shuttered and closed. The lady of the mink coat was clearly no early
riser.

Presently the conductor came to her and told her that in a few minutes
the train would arrive at Nice. Katherine handed him a tip; the man
thanked her, but still lingered. There was something odd about him.
Katherine, who had at first wondered whether the tip had not been big
enough, was now convinced that something far more serious was amiss.
His face was of a sickly pallor, he was shaking all over, and looked
as if he had been frightened out of his life. He was eyeing her in a
curious manner. Presently he said abruptly: "Madame will excuse me, but
is she expecting friends to meet her at Nice?"

"Probably," said Katherine. "Why?"

But the man merely shook his head and murmured something that Katherine
could not catch and moved away, not reappearing until the train came to
rest at the station, when he started handing her belongings down from
the window.

Katherine stood for a moment or two on the platform rather at a loss,
but a fair young man with an ingenuous face came up to her and said
rather hesitatingly:

"Miss Grey, is it not?"

Katherine said that it was, and the young man beamed upon her
seraphically and murmured:

"I am Chubby, you know--Lady Tamplin's husband. I expect she mentioned
me, but perhaps she forgot. Have you got your _billet de bagages_? I
lost mine when I came out this year, and you would not believe the fuss
they made about it. Regular French red tape!"

Katherine produced it, and was just about to move off beside him when a
very gentle and insidious voice murmured in her ear:

"A little moment, Madame, if you please."

Katherine turned to behold an individual who made up for
insignificance of stature by a large quantity of gold lace and uniform.
The individual explained. "There were certain formalities. Madame
would perhaps be so kind as to accompany him. The regulations of the
police--" He threw up his arms. "Absurd, doubtless, but there it was."

Mr. Chubby Evans listened with a very imperfect comprehension, his
French being of a limited order.

"So like the French," murmured Mr. Evans. He was one of those staunch
patriotic Britons who, having made a portion of a foreign country their
own, strongly resent the original inhabitants of it. "Always up to
some silly dodge or other. They've never tackled people on the station
before, though. This is something quite new. I suppose you'll have to
go."

Katherine departed with her guide. Somewhat to her surprise, he led
her towards a siding where a coach of the departed train had been
shunted. He invited her to mount into this, and, preceding her down
the corridor, held aside the door of one of the compartments. In it
was a pompous-looking official personage, and with him a nondescript
being who appeared to be a clerk. The pompous-looking personage rose
politely, bowed to Katherine, and said:

"You will excuse me, Madame, but there are certain formalities to be
complied with. Madame speaks French, I trust?"

"Sufficiently, I think, Monsieur," replied Katherine in that language.

"That is good. Pray be seated, Madame. I am M. Caux, the Commissary of
Police." He blew out his chest importantly, and Katherine tried to look
sufficiently impressed.

"You wish to see my passport?" she inquired. "Here it is."

The Commissary eyed her keenly and gave a little grunt.

"Thank you, Madame," he said, taking the passport from her. He cleared
his throat. "But what I really desire is a little information."

"Information?"

The Commissary nodded his head slowly.

"About a lady who has been a fellow-passenger of yours. You lunched
with her yesterday."

"I am afraid I can't tell you anything about her. We fell into
conversation over our meal, but she is a complete stranger to me. I
have never seen her before."

"And yet," said the Commissary sharply, "you returned to her
compartment with her after lunch and sat talking for some time?"

"Yes," said Katherine; "that is true."

The Commissary seemed to expect her to say something more. He looked at
her encouragingly.

"Yes, Madame?"

"Well, Monsieur?" said Katherine.

"You can, perhaps, give me some kind of idea of that conversation?"

"I could," said Katherine, "but at the moment I see no reason to do so."

In somewhat British fashion she felt annoyed. This foreign official
seemed to her impertinent.

"No reason?" cried the Commissary. "Oh yes, Madame, I can assure you
that there _is_ a reason."

"Then perhaps you will give it to me."

The Commissary rubbed his chin thoughtfully for a minute or two without
speaking.

"Madame," he said at last, "the reason is very simple. The lady in
question was found dead in her compartment this morning."

"Dead!" gasped Katherine. "What was it--heart failure?"

"No," said the Commissary in a reflective, dreamy voice. "No--she was
murdered."

"Murdered!" cried Katherine.

"So you see, Madame, why we are anxious for any information we can
possibly get."

"But surely her maid--"

"The maid has disappeared."

"Oh!" Katherine paused to assemble her thoughts.

"Since the conductor had seen you talking with her in her compartment,
he quite naturally reported the fact to the police, and that is why,
Madame, we have detained you, in the hope of gaining some information."

"I am very sorry," said Katherine; "I don't even know her name."

"Her name is Kettering. That we know from her passport and from the
labels on her luggage. If we--"

There was a knock on the compartment door. M. Caux frowned. He opened
it about six inches.

"What is the matter?" he said peremptorily. "I cannot be disturbed."

The egg-shaped head of Katherine's dinner acquaintance showed itself in
the aperture. On his face was a beaming smile.

"My name," he said, "is Hercule Poirot."

"Not," the Commissary stammered, "not _the_ Hercule Poirot?"

"The same," said M. Poirot. "I remember meeting you once, M. Caux, at
the _Sûreté_ in Paris, though doubtless you have forgotten me?"

"Not at all, Monsieur, not at all," declared the Commissary heartily.
"But enter, I pray of you. You know of this--"

"Yes, I know," said Hercule Poirot. "I came to see if I might be of any
assistance?"

"We should be flattered," replied the Commissary promptly. "Let me
present you, M. Poirot, to"--he consulted the passport he still held
in his hand--"to Madame--er--Mademoiselle Grey."

Poirot smiled across at Katherine.

"It is strange, is it not," he murmured, "that my words should have
come true so quickly?"

"Mademoiselle, alas! can tell us very little," said the Commissary.

"I have been explaining," said Katherine, "that this poor lady was a
complete stranger to me."

Poirot nodded.

"But she talked to you, did she not?" he said gently. "You formed an
impression--is it not so?"

"Yes," said Katherine thoughtfully. "I suppose I did."

"And that impression was--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle"--the Commissary jerked himself forward--"let us by
all means have your impressions."

Katherine sat turning the whole thing over in her mind. She felt in
a way as if she were betraying a confidence, but with that ugly word
"Murder" ringing in her ears she dared not keep anything back. Too much
might hang upon it. So, as nearly as she could, she repeated word for
word the conversation she had had with the dead woman.

"That is interesting," said the Commissary, glancing at the other. "Eh,
M. Poirot, that is interesting? Whether it has anything to do with the
crime--" He left the sentence unfinished.

"I suppose it could not be suicide," said Katherine, rather doubtfully.

"No," said the Commissary, "it could not be suicide. She was strangled
with a length of black cord."

"Oh!" Katherine shivered. M. Caux spread out his hands apologetically.
"It is not nice--no. I think that our train robbers are more brutal
than they are in your country."

"It is horrible."

"Yes, yes"--he was soothing and apologetic--"but you have great
courage, Mademoiselle. At once, as soon as I saw you, I said to myself,
'Mademoiselle has great courage.' That is why I am going to ask you
to do something more--something distressing, but I assure you very
necessary."

Katherine looked at him apprehensively.

He spread out his hands apologetically.

"I am going to ask you, Mademoiselle, to be so good as to accompany me
to the next compartment."

"Must I?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"Some one must identify her," said the Commissary, "and since the maid
has disappeared"--he coughed significantly--"you appear to be the
person who has seen most of her since she joined the train."

"Very well," said Katherine quietly; "if it is necessary--"

She rose. Poirot gave her a little nod of approval.

"Mademoiselle is sensible," he said. "May I accompany you, M. Caux?"

"Enchanted, my dear M. Poirot."

They went out into the corridor, and M. Caux unlocked the door of the
dead woman's compartment. The blinds on the far side had been drawn
half-way up to admit light. The dead woman lay on the berth to their
left, in so natural a posture that one could have thought her asleep.
The bedclothes were drawn up over her, and her head was turned to the
wall, so that only the red auburn curls showed. Very gently M. Caux
laid a hand on her shoulder and turned the body back so that the face
came into view. Katherine flinched a little and dug her nails into
her palms. A heavy blow had disfigured the features almost beyond
recognition. Poirot gave a sharp exclamation.

"When was that done, I wonder?" he demanded. "Before death or after?"

"The doctor says after," said M. Caux.

"Strange," said Poirot, drawing his brows together. He turned to
Katherine. "Be brave, Mademoiselle; look at her well. Are you sure that
this is the woman you talked to in the train yesterday?"

Katherine had good nerves. She steeled herself to look long and
earnestly at the recumbent figure. Then she leaned forward and took up
the dead woman's hand.

"I am quite sure," she replied at length. "The face is too disfigured
to recognize, but the build and carriage and hair are exact, and
besides I noticed _this_"--she pointed to a tiny mole on the dead
woman's wrist--"while I was talking to her."

"_Bon_," approved Poirot. "You are an excellent witness, Mademoiselle.
There is, then, no question as to the identity, but it is strange, all
the same." He frowned down on the dead woman in perplexity.

M. Caux shrugged his shoulders.

"The murderer was carried away by rage, doubtless," he suggested.

"If she had been struck down, it would have been comprehensible," mused
Poirot, "but the man who strangled her slipped up behind and caught
her unawares. A little choke--a little gurgle--that is all that would
be heard, and then afterwards--that smashing blow on her face. Now
why? Did he hope that if the face were unrecognizable she might not
be identified? Or did he hate her so much that he could not resist
striking that blow even after she was dead?"

Katherine shuddered, and he turned at once to her kindly.

"You must not let me distress you, Mademoiselle," he said. "To you this
is all very new and terrible. To me, alas! it is an old story. One
moment, I pray of you both."

They stood against the door watching him as he went quickly round the
compartment. He noted the dead woman's clothes neatly folded on the
end of the berth, the big fur coat that hung from a hook, and the
little red lacquer hat tossed up on the rack. Then he passed through
into the adjoining compartment, that in which Katherine had seen the
maid sitting. Here the berth had not been made up. Three or four rugs
were piled loosely on the seat; there was a hat-box and a couple of
suit-cases. He turned suddenly to Katherine.

"You were in here yesterday," he said. "Do you see anything changed,
anything missing?"

Katherine looked carefully round both compartments.

"Yes," she said, "there is something missing--a scarlet morocco case.
It had the initials 'R. V. K.' on it. It might have been a small
dressing-case or a big jewel-case. When I saw it, the maid was holding
it."

"Ah!" said Poirot.

"But, surely," said Katherine. "I--of course, I don't know anything
about such things, but surely it is plain enough, if the maid and the
jewel-case are missing?"

"You mean that it was the maid who was the thief? No, Mademoiselle;
there is a very good reason against that."

"What?"

"The maid was left behind in Paris."

He turned to Poirot.

"I should like you to hear the conductor's story yourself," he murmured
confidentially. "It is very suggestive."

"Mademoiselle would doubtless like to hear it also," said Poirot. "You
do not object, Monsieur le Commissaire?"

"No," said the Commissary, who clearly did object very much. "No,
certainly, M. Poirot, if you say so. You have finished here?"

"I think so. One little minute."

He had been turning over the rugs, and now he took one to the window
and looked at it, picking something off it with his fingers.

"What is it?" demanded M. Caux sharply.

"Four auburn hairs." He bent over the dead woman. "Yes, they are from
the head of Madame."

"And what of it? Do you attach importance to them?"

Poirot let the rug drop back on the seat.

"What is important? What is not? One cannot say at this stage. But we
must note each little fact carefully."

They went back again into the first compartment, and in a minute or two
the conductor of the carriage arrived to be questioned.

"Your name is Pierre Michel?" said the Commissary.

"Yes, Monsieur le Commissaire."

"I should like you to repeat to this gentleman"--he indicated
Poirot--"the story that you told me as to what happened in Paris."

"Very good, Monsieur le Commissaire. It was after we had left the Gare
de Lyon. I came along to make the beds, thinking that Madame would be
at dinner, but she had a dinner basket in her compartment. She said
to me that she had been obliged to leave her maid behind in Paris, so
that I need make up only one berth. She took her dinner basket into the
adjoining compartment, and sat there while I made up the bed; then she
told me that she did not wish to be wakened early in the morning, that
she liked to sleep on. I told her I quite understood, and she wished me
'good-night.'"

"You yourself did not go into the adjoining compartment?"

"No, Monsieur."

"Then you did not happen to notice if a scarlet morocco case was
amongst the luggage there?"

"No, Monsieur, I did not."

"Would it have been possible for a man to have been concealed in the
adjoining compartment?"

The conductor reflected.

"The door was half open," he said. "If a man had stood behind that door
I should not have been able to see him, but he would, of course, have
been perfectly visible to Madame when she went in there."

"Quite so," said Poirot. "Is there anything more you have to tell us?"

"I think that is all, Monsieur. I can remember nothing else."

"And now this morning?" prompted Poirot.

"As Madame had ordered, I did not disturb her. It was not until just
before Cannes that I ventured to knock at the door. Getting no reply, I
opened it. The lady appeared to be in her bed asleep. I took her by the
shoulder to rouse her, and then--"

"And then you saw what had happened," volunteered Poirot. "_Très bien._
I think I know all I want to know."

"I hope, Monsieur le Commissaire, it is not that I have been guilty of
any negligence," said the man piteously. "Such an affair to happen on
the Blue Train! It is horrible."

"Console yourself," said the Commissary. "Everything will be done to
keep the affair as quiet as possible, if only in the interests of
justice. I cannot think you have been guilty of any negligence."

"And Monsieur le Commissaire will report as much to the Company?"

"But certainly, but certainly," said M. Caux impatiently. "That will do
now."

The conductor withdrew.

"According to the medical evidence," said the Commissary, "the lady
was probably dead before the train reached Lyons. Who then was the
murderer? From Mademoiselle's story, it seems clear that somewhere on
her journey she was to meet this man of whom she spoke. Her action in
getting rid of the maid seems significant. Did the man join the train
at Paris, and did she conceal him in the adjoining compartment? If so,
they may have quarrelled, and he may have killed her in a fit of rage.
That is one possibility. The other, and the more likely to my mind, is
that her assailant was a train robber travelling on the train; that
he stole along the corridor unseen by the conductor, killed her, and
went off with the red morocco case, which doubtless contained jewels of
some value. In all probability he left the train at Lyons, and we have
already telegraphed to the station there for full particulars of any
one seen leaving the train."

"Or he might have come on to Nice," suggested Poirot.

"He might," agreed the Commissary, "but that would be a very bold
course."

Poirot let a minute or two go by before speaking, and then he said:

"In the latter case you think the man was an ordinary train robber?"

The Commissary shrugged his shoulders.

"It depends. We must get hold of the maid. It is possible that she has
the red morocco case with her. If so, then the man of whom she spoke to
Mademoiselle may be concerned in the case, and the affair is a crime
of passion. I myself think the solution of a train robber is the more
probable. These bandits have become very bold of late."

Poirot looked suddenly across to Katherine.

"And you, Mademoiselle," he said, "you heard and saw nothing during the
night?"

"Nothing," said Katherine.

Poirot turned to the Commissary.

"We need detain Mademoiselle no longer, I think," he suggested.

The latter nodded.

"She will leave us her address?" he said.

Katherine gave him the name of Lady Tamplin's villa. Poirot made her a
little bow.

"You permit that I see you again, Mademoiselle?" he said. "Or have you
so many friends that your time will be all taken up?"

"On the contrary," said Katherine, "I shall have plenty of leisure, and
I shall be very pleased to see you again."

"Excellent," said Poirot, and gave her a little friendly nod. "This
shall be a _'roman policier' à nous_. We will investigate this affair
together."




                      12. At the Villa Marguerite


"Then you were really in the thick of it all!" said Lady Tamplin
enviously. "My dear, how thrilling!" She opened her china blue eyes
very wide and gave a little sigh.

"A real murder," said Mr. Evans gloatingly.

"Of course Chubby had no idea of anything of the kind," went on Lady
Tamplin; "he simply could _not_ imagine why the police wanted you. My
dear, what an opportunity! I think, you know--yes, I certainly think
something might be made out of this."

A calculating look rather marred the ingenuousness of the blue eyes.

Katherine felt slightly uncomfortable. They were just finishing lunch,
and she looked in turn at the three people sitting round the table.
Lady Tamplin, full of practical schemes; Mr. Evans, beaming with naïve
appreciation, and Lenox with a queer crooked smile on her dark face.

"Marvellous luck," murmured Chubby; "I wish I could have gone along
with you--and seen--all the exhibits."

His tone was wistful and childlike.

Katherine said nothing. The police had laid no injunctions of secrecy
upon her, and it was clearly impossible to suppress the bare facts or
try to keep them from her hostess. But she did rather wish it had been
possible to do so.

"Yes," said Lady Tamplin, coming suddenly out of her reverie, "I do
think something might be done. A little account, you know, cleverly
written up. An eye-witness, a feminine touch: '_How I chatted with the
dead woman, little thinking_--' that sort of thing, you know."

"Rot!" said Lenox.

"You have no idea," said Lady Tamplin in a soft, wistful voice, "what
newspapers will pay for a little titbit! Written, of course, by some
one of really unimpeachable social position. You would not like to do
it yourself, I dare say, Katherine dear, but just give me the bare
bones of it, and _I_ will manage the whole thing for you. Mr. de
Haviland is a special friend of mine. We have a little understanding
together. A most delightful man--not at all reporterish. How does the
idea strike you, Katherine?"

"I would much prefer to do nothing of the kind," said Katherine bluntly.

Lady Tamplin was rather disconcerted at this uncompromising refusal.
She sighed and turned to the elucidation of further details.

"A very striking-looking woman, you said? I wonder now who she could
have been. You didn't hear her name?"

"It was mentioned," Katherine admitted, "but I can't remember it. You
see, I was rather upset."

"I should think so," said Mr. Evans; "it must have been a beastly
shock."

It is to be doubted whether, even if Katherine had remembered the
name, she would have admitted the fact. Lady Tamplin's remorseless
cross-examination was making her restive. Lenox, who was observant in
her own way, noticed this, and offered to take Katherine upstairs to
see her room. She left her there, remarking kindly before she went:
"You mustn't mind Mother; she would make a few pennies' profit out of
her dying grandmother if she could."

Lenox went down again to find her mother and her step-father discussing
the newcomer.

"Presentable," said Lady Tamplin, "quite presentable. Her clothes are
all right. That grey thing is the same model that Gladys Cooper wore in
_Palm Trees in Egypt_."

"Have you noticed her eyes--what?" interposed Mr. Evans.

"Never mind her eyes, Chubby," said Lady Tamplin tartly; "we are
discussing the things that really matter."

"Oh, quite," said Mr. Evans, and retired into his shell.

"She doesn't seem to me very--malleable," said Lady Tamplin, rather
hesitating to choose the right word.

"She has all the instincts of a lady, as they say in books," said
Lenox, with a grin.

"Narrow-minded," murmured Lady Tamplin. "Inevitable under the
circumstances, I suppose."

"I expect you will do your best to broaden her," said Lenox, with a
grin, "but you will have your work cut out. Just now, you noticed, she
stuck down her fore feet and laid back her ears and refused to budge."

"Anyway," said Lady Tamplin hopefully, "she doesn't look to me at all
mean. Some people, when they come into money, seem to attach undue
importance to it."

"Oh, you'll easily touch her for what you want," said Lenox; "and,
after all, that is all that matters, isn't it? That is what she is here
for."

"She is my own cousin," said Lady Tamplin, with dignity.

"Cousin, eh?" said Mr. Evans, waking up again. "I suppose I call her
Katherine, don't I?"

"It is of no importance at all what you call her, Chubby," said Lady
Tamplin.

"Good," said Mr. Evans; "then I will. Do you suppose she plays tennis?"
he added hopefully.

"Of course not," said Lady Tamplin. "She has been a companion, I tell
you. Companions don't play tennis--or golf. They might possibly play
golf-croquet, but I have always understood that they wind wool and wash
dogs most of the day."

"O God!" said Mr. Evans; "do they really?"

Lenox drifted upstairs again to Katherine's room. "Can I help you?" she
asked rather perfunctorily.

On Katherine's disclaimer, Lenox sat on the edge of the bed and stared
thoughtfully at her guest.

"Why did you come?" she said at last. "To us, I mean. We're not your
sort."

"Oh, I am anxious to get into Society."

"Don't be an ass," said Lenox promptly, detecting the flicker of a
smile. "You know what I mean well enough. You are not a bit what I
thought you would be. I say, you _have_ got some decent clothes." She
sighed. "Clothes are no good to me. I was born awkward. It's a pity,
because I love them."

"I love them too," said Katherine, "but it has not been much use my
loving them up to now. Do you think this is nice?"

She and Lenox discussed several models with artistic fervour.

"I like you," said Lenox suddenly. "I came up to warn you not to be
taken in by Mother, but I think now that there is no need to do that.
You are frightfully sincere and upright and all those queer things, but
you are not a fool. Oh hell! what is it now?"

Lady Tamplin's voice was calling plaintively from the hall:

"Lenox, Derek has just rung up. He wants to come to dinner to-night.
Will it be all right? I mean, we haven't got anything awkward, like
quails, have we?"

Lenox reassured her and came back into Katherine's room. Her face
looked brighter and less sullen.

"I'm glad old Derek is coming," she said; "you'll like him."

"Who is Derek?"

"He is Lord Leconbury's son, married a rich American woman. Women are
simply potty about him."

"Why?"

"Oh, the usual reason--very good-looking and a regular bad lot. Every
one goes off their head about him."

"Do you?"

"Sometimes I do," said Lenox, "and sometimes I think I would like to
marry a nice curate and live in the country and grow things in frames."
She paused a minute, and then added, "An Irish curate would be best,
and then I should hunt."

After a minute or two she reverted to her former theme. "There is
something queer about Derek. All that family are a bit potty--mad
gamblers, you know. In the old days they used to gamble away their
wives and their estates, and did most reckless things just for the love
of it. Derek would have made a perfect highwayman--debonair and gay,
just the right manner." She moved to the door. "Well, come down when
you feel like it."

Left alone, Katherine gave herself up to thought. Just at present she
felt thoroughly ill at ease and jarred by her surroundings. The shock
of the discovery in the train and the reception of the news by her
new friends jarred upon her susceptibilities. She thought long and
earnestly about the murdered woman. She had been sorry for Ruth, but
she could not honestly say that she had liked her. She had divined only
too well the ruthless egoism that was the keynote of her personality,
and it repelled her.

She had been amused and a trifle hurt by the other's cool dismissal of
her when she had served her turn. That she had come to some decision,
Katherine was quite certain, but she wondered now what that decision
had been. Whatever it was, death had stepped in and made all decisions
meaningless. Strange that it should have been so, and that a brutal
crime should have been the ending of that fateful journey. But suddenly
Katherine remembered a small fact that she ought, perhaps, to have told
the police--a fact that had for the moment escaped her memory. Was it
of any real importance? She had certainly thought that she had seen a
man going into that particular compartment, but she realized that she
might easily have been mistaken. It might have been the compartment
next door, and certainly the man in question could be no train robber.
She recalled him very clearly as she had seen him on those two
previous occasions--once at the Savoy and once at Cook's office. No,
doubtless she had been mistaken. He had not gone into the dead woman's
compartment, and it was perhaps as well that she had said nothing to
the police. She might have done incalculable harm by doing so.

She went down to join the others on the terrace outside. Through the
branches of mimosa, she looked out over the blue of the Mediterranean,
and, whilst listening with half an ear to Lady Tamplin's chatter, she
was glad that she had come. This was better than St. Mary Mead.

That evening she put on the mauvy pink dress that went by the name of
_soupir d'automne_, and after smiling at her reflection in the mirror,
went downstairs with, for the first time in her life, a faint feeling
of shyness.

Most of Lady Tamplin's guests had arrived, and since noise was the
essential of Lady Tamplin's parties, the din was already terrific.
Chubby rushed up to Katherine, pressed a cocktail upon her, and took
her under his wing.

"Oh, here you are, Derek," cried Lady Tamplin, as the door opened to
admit the last comer. "Now at last we can have something to eat. I am
starving."

Katherine looked across the room. She was startled. So this--was Derek,
and she realized that she was not surprised. She had always known that
she would some day meet the man whom she had seen three times by such
a curious chain of coincidences. She thought, too, that he recognized
her. He paused abruptly in what he was saying to Lady Tamplin, and
went on again as though with an effort. They all went into dinner, and
Katherine found that he was placed beside her. He turned to her at once
with a vivid smile.

"I knew I was going to meet you soon," he remarked, "but I never dreamt
that it would be here. It had to be, you know. Once at the Savoy and
once at Cook's--never twice without three times. Don't say you can't
remember me or never noticed me. I insist upon your pretending that you
noticed me, anyway."

"Oh, I did," said Katherine; "but this is not the third time. It is the
fourth. I saw you on the Blue Train."

"On the Blue Train!" Something undefinable came over his manner; she
could not have said just what it was. It was as though he had received
a check, a setback. Then he said carelessly:

"What was the rumpus this morning? Somebody had died, hadn't they?"

"Yes," said Katherine slowly; "somebody had died."

"You shouldn't die on a train," remarked Derek flippantly. "I believe
it causes all sorts of legal and international complications, and it
gives the train an excuse for being even later than usual."

"Mr. Kettering?" A stout American lady, who was sitting opposite,
leaned forward and spoke to him with the deliberate intonation of her
race. "Mr. Kettering, I do believe you have forgotten me, and I thought
you such a perfectly lovely man."

Derek leaned forward, answering her, and Katherine sat almost dazed.

Kettering! That was the name, of course! She remembered it now--but
what a strange, ironical situation! Here was this man whom she had seen
go into his wife's compartment last night, who had left her alive and
well, and now he was sitting at dinner, quite unconscious of the fate
that had befallen her. Of that there was no doubt. He did not know.

A servant was leaning over Derek, handing him a note and murmuring in
his ear. With a word of excuse to Lady Tamplin, he broke it open, and
an expression of utter astonishment came over his face as he read; then
he looked at his hostess.

"This is most extraordinary. I say, Rosalie, I am afraid I will have to
leave you. The Prefect of Police wants to see me at once. I can't think
what about."

"Your sins have found you out," remarked Lenox.

"They must have," said Derek; "probably some idiotic nonsense, but I
suppose I shall have to push off to the Prefecture. How dare the old
boy rout me out from dinner? It ought to be something deadly serious to
justify that," and he laughed as he pushed back his chair and rose to
leave the room.




                     13. Van Aldin Gets a Telegram


On the afternoon of the 15th of February a thick yellow fog had settled
down on London. Rufus Van Aldin was in his suite at the Savoy and was
making the most of the atmospheric conditions by working double time.
Knighton was overjoyed. He had found it difficult of late to get his
employer to concentrate on the matters in hand. When he had ventured to
urge certain courses, Van Aldin had put him off with a curt word. But
now Van Aldin seemed to be throwing himself into work with redoubled
energy, and the secretary made the most of his opportunities. Always
tactful, he plied the spur so unobtrusively that Van Aldin never
suspected it.

Yet in the middle of this absorption in business matters, one
little fact lay at the back of Van Aldin's mind. A chance remark of
Knighton's, uttered by the secretary in all unconsciousness, had given
rise to it. It now festered unseen, gradually reaching further and
further forward into Van Aldin's consciousness, until at last, in spite
of himself, he had to yield to its insistence.

He listened to what Knighton was saying with his usual air of keen
attention, but in reality not one word of it penetrated his mind. He
nodded automatically, however, and the secretary turned to some other
papers. As he was sorting them out, his employer spoke:

"Do you mind telling me that over again, Knighton?"

For a moment Knighton was at a loss.

"You mean about this, sir?" He held up a closely written Company report.

"No, no," said Van Aldin; "what you told me about seeing Ruth's maid in
Paris last night. I can't make it out. You must have been mistaken."

"I can't have been mistaken, sir; I actually spoke to her."

"Well, tell me the whole thing again."

Knighton complied.

"I had fixed up the deal with Bartheimers," he explained, "and had gone
back to the Ritz to pick up my traps preparatory to having dinner and
catching the nine o'clock train from the Gare du Nord. At the reception
desk I saw a woman whom I was quite sure was Mrs. Kettering's maid. I
went up to her and asked if Mrs. Kettering was staying there."

"Yes, yes," said Van Aldin. "Of course. Naturally. And she told you
that Ruth had gone on to the Riviera and had sent her to the Ritz to
await further orders there?"

"Exactly that, sir."

"It is very odd," said Van Aldin. "Very odd, indeed, unless the woman
had been impertinent or something of that kind."

"In that case," objected Knighton, "surely Mrs. Kettering would have
paid her down a sum of money, and told her to go back to England. She
would hardly have sent her to the Ritz."

"No," muttered the millionaire; "that's true."

He was about to say something further, but checked himself. He was
fond of Knighton and liked and trusted him, but he could hardly discuss
his daughter's private affairs with his secretary. He had already felt
hurt by Ruth's lack of frankness, and this chance information which had
come to him did nothing to allay his misgivings.

Why had Ruth got rid of her maid in Paris? What possible object or
motive could she have had in so doing?

He reflected for a moment or two on the curious combination of chance.
How should it have occurred to Ruth, except as the wildest coincidence,
that the first person that the maid should run across in Paris should
be her father's secretary? Ah, but that was the way things happened.
That was the way things got found out.

He winced at the last phrase; it had arisen with complete naturalness
to his mind. Was there then "something to be found out"? He hated to
put this question to himself; he had no doubt of the answer. The answer
was--he was sure of it--Armand de la Roche.

It was bitter to Van Aldin that a daughter of his should be gulled
by such a man, yet he was forced to admit that she was in good
company--that other well-bred and intelligent women had succumbed just
as easily to the Count's fascination. Men saw through him, women did
not.

He sought now for a phrase that would allay any suspicion that his
secretary might have felt.

"Ruth is always changing her mind about things at a moment's notice,"
he remarked, and then he added in a would-be careless tone: "The maid
didn't give any--er--reason for this change of plan?"

Knighton was careful to make his voice as natural as possible as he
replied:

"She said, sir, that Mrs. Kettering had met a friend unexpectedly."

"Is that so?"

The secretary's practised ears caught the note of strain underlying the
seemingly casual tone.

"Oh, I see. Man or woman?"

"I think she said a man, sir."

Van Aldin nodded. His worst fears were being realized. He rose from
his chair, and began pacing up and down the room, a habit of his when
agitated. Unable to contain his feelings any longer, he burst forth:

"There is one thing no man can do, and that is to get a woman to
listen to reason. Somehow or other, they don't seem to have any kind of
_sense_. Talk of woman's instinct--why, it is well known all the world
over that a woman is the surest mark for any rascally swindler. Not one
in ten of them knows a scoundrel when she meets one; they can be preyed
on by any good-looking fellow with a soft side to his tongue. If I had
my way--"

He was interrupted. A page-boy entered with a telegram. Van Aldin tore
it open, and his face went a sudden chalky white. He caught hold of the
back of a chair to steady himself, and waved the page-boy from the room.

"What's the matter, sir?"

Knighton had risen in concern.

"Ruth!" said Van Aldin hoarsely.

"Mrs. Kettering?"

"Killed!"

"An accident to the train?"

Van Aldin shook his head.

"No. From this it seems she has been robbed as well. They don't use the
word, Knighton, but my poor girl has been murdered."

"Oh, my God, sir!"

Van Aldin tapped the telegram with his forefinger.

"This is from the police at Nice. I must go out there by the first
train."

Knighton was efficient as ever. He glanced at the clock.

"Five o'clock from Victoria, sir."

"That's right. You will come with me, Knighton. Tell my man, Archer,
and pack your own things. See to everything here. I want to go round to
Curzon Street."

The telephone rang sharply, and the secretary lifted the receiver.

"Yes; who is it?"

Then to Van Aldin.

"Mr. Goby, sir."

"Goby? I can't see him now. No--wait, we have plenty of time. Tell them
to send him up."

Van Aldin was a strong man. Already he had recovered that iron calm of
his. Few people would have noticed anything amiss in his greeting to
Mr. Goby.

"I am pressed for time, Goby. Got anything important to tell me?"

Mr. Goby coughed.

"The movements of Mr. Kettering, sir. You wished them reported to you."

"Yes--well?"

"Mr. Kettering, sir, left London for the Riviera yesterday morning."

"What?"

Something in his voice must have startled Mr. Goby. That worthy
gentleman departed from his usual practice of never looking at the
person to whom he was talking, and stole a fleeting glance at the
millionaire.

"What train did he go on?" demanded Van Aldin.

"The Blue Train, sir."

Mr. Goby coughed again and spoke to the clock on the mantelpiece.

"Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer from the Parthenon, went by the same
train."




                         14. Ada Mason's Story


"I cannot repeat to you often enough, Monsieur, our horror, our
consternation, and the deep sympathy we feel for you."

Thus M. Carrège, the Juge d'Instruction, addressed Van Aldin. M.
Caux, the Commissary, made sympathetic noises in his throat. Van
Aldin brushed away horror, consternation, and sympathy with an abrupt
gesture. The scene was the Examining Magistrate's room at Nice. Besides
M. Carrège, the Commissary, and Van Aldin, there was a further person
in the room. It was that person who now spoke.

"M. Van Aldin," he said, "desires action--swift action."

"Ah!" cried the Commissary, "I have not yet presented you. M. Van
Aldin, this is M. Hercule Poirot; you have doubtless heard of him.
Although he has retired from his profession for some years now,
his name is still a household word as one of the greatest living
detectives."

"Pleased to meet you, M. Poirot," said Van Aldin, falling back
mechanically on a formula that he had discarded some years ago. "You
have retired from your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. Now I enjoy the world."

The little man made a grandiloquent gesture.

"M. Poirot happened to be travelling on the Blue Train," explained the
Commissary, "and he has been so kind as to assist us out of his vast
experience."

The millionaire looked at Poirot keenly. Then he said unexpectedly:

"I am a very rich man, M. Poirot. It is usually said that a rich man
labours under the belief that he can buy everything and every one. That
is not true. I am a big man in my way, and one big man can ask a favour
from another big man."

Poirot nodded a quick appreciation.

"That is very well said, M. Van Aldin. I place myself entirely at your
service."

"Thank you," said Van Aldin. "I can only say call upon me at any time,
and you will not find me ungrateful. And now, gentlemen, to business."

"I propose," said M. Carrège, "to interrogate the maid, Ada Mason. You
have her here, I understand?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "We picked her up in Paris in passing through.
She was very upset to hear of her mistress's death, but she tells her
story coherently enough."

"We will have her in, then," said M. Carrège.

He rang the bell on his desk, and in a few minutes Ada Mason entered
the room.

She was very neatly dressed in black, and the tip of her nose was red.
She had exchanged her grey travelling gloves for a pair of black suède
ones. She cast a look round the Examining Magistrate's office in some
trepidation, and seemed relieved at the presence of her mistress's
father. The Examining Magistrate prided himself on his geniality of
manner, and did his best to put her at her ease. He was helped in this
by Poirot, who acted as interpreter, and whose friendly manner was
reassuring to the Englishwoman.

"Your name is Ada Mason; is that right?"

"Ada Beatrice I was christened, sir," said Mason primly.

"Just so. And we can understand, Mason, that this has all been very
distressing."

"Oh, indeed it has, sir. I have been with many ladies and always given
satisfaction, I hope, and I never dreamt of anything of this kind
happening in any situation where I was."

"No, no," said M. Carrège.

"Naturally I have read of such things, of course, in the Sunday papers.
And then I always have understood that those foreign trains--" She
suddenly checked her flow, remembering that the gentlemen who were
speaking to her were of the same nationality as the trains.

"Now let us talk this affair over," said M. Carrège. "There was, I
understand, no question of your staying in Paris when you started from
London?"

"Oh no, sir. We were to go straight through to Nice."

"Have you ever been abroad with your mistress before?"

"No, sir. I had only been with her two months, you see."

"Did she seem quite as usual when starting on this journey?"

"She was worried like and a bit upset, and she was rather irritable and
difficult to please."

M. Carrège nodded.

"Now then, Mason, what was the first you heard of your stopping in
Paris?"

"It was at the place they call the Gare de Lyon, sir. My mistress was
thinking of getting out and walking up and down the platform. She was
just going out into the corridor when she gave a sudden exclamation,
and came back into her compartment with a gentleman. She shut the door
between her carriage and mine, so that I didn't see or hear anything,
till she suddenly opened it again and told me that she had changed her
plans. She gave me some money and told me to get out and go to the
Ritz. They knew her well there, she said, and would give me a room. I
was to wait there until I heard from her; she would wire me what she
wanted me to do. I had just time to get my things together and jump out
of the train before it started off. It was a rush."

"While Mrs. Kettering was telling you this, where was the gentleman?"

"He was standing in the other compartment, sir, looking out of the
window."

"Can you describe him to us?"

"Well, you see, sir, I hardly saw him. He had his back to me most of
the time. He was a tall gentleman and dark; that's all I can say. He
was dressed very like any other gentleman in a dark blue overcoat and a
grey hat."

"Was he one of the passengers on the train?"

"I don't think so, sir; I took it that he had come to the station to
see Mrs. Kettering in passing through. Of course he might have been one
of the passengers; I never thought of that."

Mason seemed a little flurried by the suggestion.

"Ah!" M. Carrège passed lightly to another subject. "Your mistress
later requested the conductor not to rouse her early in the morning.
Was that a likely thing for her to do, do you think?"

"Oh yes, sir. The mistress never ate any breakfast and she didn't sleep
well at nights, so that she liked sleeping on in the morning."

Again M. Carrège passed to another subject.

"Amongst the luggage there was a scarlet morocco case, was there not?"
he asked. "Your mistress's jewel-case?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you take that case to the Ritz?"

"_Me_ take the mistress's jewel-case to the Ritz! Oh no, indeed, sir."
Mason's tones were horrified.

"You left it behind you in the carriage?"

"Yes, sir."

"Had your mistress many jewels with her, do you know?"

"A fair amount, sir; made me a bit uneasy sometimes, I can tell you,
with those nasty tales you hear of being robbed in foreign countries.
They were insured, I know, but all the same it seemed a frightful risk.
Why, the rubies alone, the mistress told me, were worth several hundred
thousand pounds."

"The rubies! What rubies?" barked Van Aldin suddenly.

Mason turned to him.

"I think it was you who gave them to her, sir, not very long ago."

"My God!" cried Van Aldin. "You don't say she had those rubies with
her? I told her to leave them at the Bank."

Mason gave once more the discreet cough which was apparently part of
her stock-in-trade as a lady's maid. This time it expressed a good
deal. It expressed far more clearly than words could have done, that
Mason's mistress had been a lady who took her own way.

"Ruth must have been mad," muttered Van Aldin. "What on earth could
have possessed her?"

M. Carrège in turn gave vent to a cough, again a cough of significance.
It riveted Van Aldin's attention on him.

"For the moment," said M. Carrège, addressing Mason, "I think that is
all. If you will go into the next room, Mademoiselle, they will read
over to you the questions and answers, and you will sign accordingly."

Mason went out escorted by the clerk, and Van Aldin said immediately to
the Magistrate:

"Well?"

M. Carrège opened a drawer in his desk, took out a letter, and handed
it across to Van Aldin.

"This was found in Madame's handbag."

    _"Chère Amie" (the letter ran)--"I will obey you; I will be
    prudent, discreet--all those things that a lover most hates. Paris
    would perhaps have been unwise, but the Isles d'Or are far away
    from the world, and you may be assured that nothing will leak out.
    It is like you and your divine sympathy to be so interested in the
    work on famous jewels that I am writing. It will, indeed, be an
    extraordinary privilege to actually see and handle these historic
    rubies. I am devoting a special passage to 'Heart of Fire.' My
    wonderful one! Soon I will make up to you for all those sad years
    of separation and emptiness.--Your ever-adoring,_

                                                            "_Armand._"




                       15. The Comte de la Roche


Van Aldin read the letter through in silence. His face turned a dull
angry crimson. The men watching him saw the veins start out on his
forehead, and his big hands clench themselves unconsciously. He handed
back the letter without a word. M. Carrège was looking with close
attention at his desk, M. Caux's eyes were fixed upon the ceiling, and
M. Hercule Poirot was tenderly brushing a speck of dust from his coat
sleeve. With the greatest tact they none of them looked at Van Aldin.

It was M. Carrège, mindful of his status and his duties, who tackled
the unpleasant subject.

"Perhaps, Monsieur," he murmured, "you are aware by whom--er--this
letter was written?"

"Yes, I know," said Van Aldin heavily.

"Ah?" said the Magistrate inquiringly.

"A scoundrel who calls himself the Comte de la Roche."

There was a pause; then M. Poirot leaned forward, straightened a ruler
on the judge's desk, and addressed the millionaire directly.

"M. Van Aldin, we are all sensible, deeply sensible, of the pain it
must give you to speak of these matters, but believe me, Monsieur, it
is not the time for concealments. If justice is to be done, we must
know everything. If you will reflect a little minute you will realize
the truth of that clearly for yourself."

Van Aldin was silent for a moment or two, then almost reluctantly he
nodded his head in agreement.

"You are quite right, M. Poirot," he said. "Painful as it is, I have no
right to keep anything back."

The Commissary gave a sigh of relief, and the Examining Magistrate
leaned back in his chair and adjusted a pince-nez on his long thin nose.

"Perhaps you will tell us in your own words, M. Van Aldin," he said,
"all that you know of this gentleman."

"It began eleven or twelve years ago--in Paris. My daughter was a young
girl then, full of foolish, romantic notions, like all young girls are.
Unknown to me, she made the acquaintance of this Comte de la Roche. You
have heard of him, perhaps?"

The Commissary and Poirot nodded in assent.

"He calls himself the Comte de la Roche," continued Van Aldin, "but I
doubt if he has any right to the title."

"You would not have found his name in the _Almanach de Gotha_," agreed
the Commissary.

"I discovered as much," said Van Aldin. "The man was a good-looking,
plausible scoundrel, with a fatal fascination for women. Ruth was
infatuated with him, but I soon put a stop to the whole affair. The man
was no better than a common swindler."

"You are quite right," said the Commissary. "The Comte de la Roche is
well known to us. If it were possible, we should have laid him by the
heels before now, but _ma foi!_ it is not easy; the fellow is cunning,
his affairs are always conducted with ladies of high social position.
If he obtains money from them under false pretences or as the fruit
of blackmail, _eh bien!_ naturally they will not prosecute. To look
foolish in the eyes of the world, oh no, that would never do, and he
has an extraordinary power over women."

"That is so," said the millionaire heavily. "Well, as I told you, I
broke the affair up pretty sharply. I told Ruth exactly what he was,
and she had, perforce, to believe me. About a year afterwards, she met
her present husband and married him. As far as I knew, that was the end
of the matter; but only a week ago, I discovered, to my amazement, that
my daughter had resumed her acquaintance with the Comte de la Roche.
She had been meeting him frequently in London and Paris. I remonstrated
with her on her imprudence, for I may tell you gentlemen, that, on my
insistence, she was preparing to bring a suit for divorce against her
husband."

"That is interesting," murmured Poirot softly, his eyes on the ceiling.

Van Aldin looked at him sharply, and then went on.

"I pointed out to her the folly of continuing to see the Comte under
the circumstances. I thought she agreed with me."

The Examining Magistrate coughed delicately.

"But according to this letter--" he began, and then stopped.

Van Aldin's jaw set itself squarely.

"I know. It's no good mincing matters. However unpleasant, we have got
to face facts. It seems clear that Ruth had arranged to go to Paris and
meet de la Roche there. After my warnings to her, however, she must
have written to the Count suggesting a change of rendezvous."

"The Isles d'Or," said the Commissary thoughtfully, "are situated just
opposite Hyères, a remote and idyllic spot."

Van Aldin nodded.

"My God! How could Ruth be such a fool?" he exclaimed bitterly. "All
this talk about writing a book on jewels! Why, he must have been after
the rubies from the first."

"There are some very famous rubies," said Poirot, "originally part of
the Crown jewels of Russia; they are unique in character, and their
value is almost fabulous. There has been a rumour that they have lately
passed into the possession of an American. Are we right in concluding,
Monsieur, that you were the purchaser?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "They came into my possession in Paris about ten
days ago."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but you have been negotiating for their purchase
for some time?"

"A little over two months. Why?"

"These things become known," said Poirot. "There is always a pretty
formidable crowd on the track of jewels such as these."

A spasm distorted the other's face.

"I remember," he said brokenly, "a joke I made to Ruth when I gave them
to her. I told her not to take them to the Riviera with her, as I could
not afford to have her robbed and murdered for the sake of the jewels.
My God! the things one says--never dreaming or knowing they will come
true."

There was a sympathetic silence, and then Poirot spoke in a detached
manner.

"Let us arrange our facts with order and precision. According to our
present theory, this is how they run. The Comte de la Roche knows of
your purchase of these jewels. By an easy stratagem he induces Madame
Kettering to bring the stones with her. He, then, is the man Mason saw
in the train at Paris."

The other three nodded in agreement.

"Madame is surprised to see him, but she deals with the situation
promptly. Mason is got out of the way; a dinner basket is ordered.
We know from the conductor that he made up the berth for the first
compartment, but he did not go into the second compartment, and that
a man could quite well have been concealed from him. So far the Comte
could have been hidden to a marvel. No one knows of his presence on the
train except Madame; he has been careful that the maid did not see his
face. All that she could say is that he was tall and dark. It is all
most conveniently vague. They are alone--and the train rushes through
the night. There would be no outcry, no struggle, for the man is, so
she thinks, her lover."

He turned gently to Van Aldin.

"Death, Monsieur, must have been almost instantaneous. We will pass
over that quickly. The Comte takes the jewel-case which lies ready to
his hand. Shortly afterwards the train draws into Lyons."

M. Carrège nodded his approval.

"Precisely. The conductor without descends. It would be easy for our
man to leave the train unseen; it would be easy to catch a train back
to Paris or anywhere he pleases. And the crime would be put down as an
ordinary train robbery. But for the letter found in Madame's bag, the
Comte would not have been mentioned."

"It was an oversight on his part not to search that bag," declared the
Commissary.

"Without doubt he thought she had destroyed that letter. It was--pardon
me, Monsieur--it was an indiscretion of the first water to keep it."

"And yet," murmured Poirot, "it was an indiscretion the Comte might
have foreseen."

"You mean?"

"I mean we are all agreed on one point, and that is that the Comte de
la Roche knows one subject _à fond_: Women. How was it that, knowing
women as he does, he did not foresee that Madame would have kept that
letter?"

"Yes--yes," said the Examining Magistrate doubtfully, "there is
something in what you say. But at such times, you understand, a man
is not master of himself. He does not reason calmly. _Mon Dieu!_" he
added, with feeling, "if our criminals kept their heads and acted with
intelligence, how should we capture them?"

Poirot smiled to himself.

"It seems to me a clear case," said the other, "but a difficult one
to prove. The Comte is a slippery customer, and unless the maid can
identify him--"

"Which is most unlikely," said Poirot.

"True, true." The Examining Magistrate rubbed his chin. "It is going to
be difficult."

"If he did indeed commit the crime--" began Poirot. M. Caux interrupted.

"If--you say _if_?"

"Yes, Monsieur le Juge, I say _if_."

The other looked at him sharply. "You are right," he said at last, "we
go too fast. It is possible that the Comte may have an alibi. Then we
should look foolish."

"_Ah, ça par exemple_," replied Poirot, "that is of no importance
whatever. Naturally, if he committed the crime he will have an alibi. A
man with the Comte's experience does not neglect to take precautions.
No, I said _if_ for a very different reason."

"And what was that?"

Poirot wagged an emphatic forefinger. "The psychology."

"Eh?" said the Commissary.

"The psychology is at fault. The Comte is a scoundrel--yes. The Comte
is a swindler--yes. The Comte preys upon women--yes. He proposes to
steal Madame's jewels--again yes. Is he the kind of man to commit
murder? I say _no_! A man of the type of the Comte is always a coward;
he takes no risks. He plays the safe, the mean, what the English call
the low-down game; but murder, a hundred times no!" He shook his head
in a dissatisfied manner.

The Examining Magistrate, however, did not seem disposed to agree with
him.

"The day always comes when such gentry lose their heads and go too
far," he observed sagely. "Doubtless that is the case here. Without
wishing to disagree with you, M. Poirot--"

"It was only an opinion," Poirot hastened to explain. "The case is, of
course, in your hands, and you will do what seems fit to you."

"I am satisfied in my own mind that the Comte de la Roche is the man we
need to get hold of," said M. Carrège. "You agree with me, Monsieur le
Commissaire?"

"Perfectly."

"And you, M. Van Aldin?"

"Yes," said the millionaire. "Yes; the man is a thorough-paced villain,
no doubt about it."

"It will be difficult to lay hands on him, I am afraid," said the
Magistrate, "but we will do our best. Telegraphed instructions shall go
out at once."

"Permit me to assist you," said Poirot. "There need be no difficulty."

"Eh?"

The others stared at him. The little man smiled beamingly back at them.

"It is my business to know things," he explained. "The Comte is a man
of intelligence. He is at present at a villa he has leased, the Villa
Marina at Antibes."




                     16. Poirot Discusses the Case


Everybody looked respectfully at Poirot. Undoubtedly the little man had
scored heavily. The Commissary laughed--on a rather hollow note.

"You teach us all our business," he cried. "M. Poirot knows more than
the police."

Poirot gazed complacently at the ceiling, adopting a mock-modest air.

"What will you; it is my little hobby," he murmured, "to know things.
Naturally I have the time to indulge it. I am not overburdened with
affairs."

"Ah!" said the Commissary shaking his head portentously. "As for me--"

He made an exaggerated gesture to represent the cares that lay on his
shoulders.

Poirot turned suddenly to Van Aldin.

"You agree, Monsieur, with this view? You feel certain that the Comte
de la Roche is the murderer?"

"Why, it would seem so--yes, certainly."

Something guarded in the answer made the Examining Magistrate look at
the American curiously. Van Aldin seemed aware of his scrutiny and made
an effort as though to shake off some preoccupation.

"What about my son-in-law?" he asked. "You have acquainted him with the
news? He is in Nice, I understand."

"Certainly, Monsieur." The Commissary hesitated, and then murmured very
discreetly: "You are doubtless aware, M. Van Aldin, that M. Kettering
was also one of the passengers on the Blue Train that night?"

The millionaire nodded.

"Heard it just before I left London," he vouchsafed laconically.

"He tells us," continued the Commissary, "that he had no idea his wife
was travelling on the train."

"I bet he hadn't," said Van Aldin grimly. "It would have been rather a
nasty shock to him if he'd come across her on it."

The three men looked at him questioningly.

"I'm not going to mince matters," said Van Aldin savagely. "No one
knows what my poor girl has had to put up with. Derek Kettering wasn't
alone. He had a lady with him."

"Ah?"

"Mirelle--the dancer."

M. Carrège and the Commissary looked at each other and nodded as though
confirming some previous conversation. M. Carrège leaned back in his
chair, joined his hands, and fixed his eyes on the ceiling.

"Ah!" he murmured again. "One wondered." He coughed. "One has heard
rumours."

"The lady," said M. Caux, "is very notorious."

"And also," murmured Poirot softly, "very expensive."

Van Aldin had gone very red in the face. He leant forward and hit the
table a bang with his fist.

"See here," he cried, "my son-in-law is a damned scoundrel!"

He glared at them, looking from one face to another.

"Oh, I know," he went on. "Good looks and a charming, easy manner.
It took me in once upon a time. I suppose he pretended to be
broken-hearted when you broke the news to him--that is, if he didn't
know it already."

"Oh, it came as a complete surprise to him. He was overwhelmed."

"Darned young hypocrite," said Van Aldin. "Simulated great grief, I
suppose?"

"N--no," said the Commissary cautiously. "I would not quite say
that--eh, M. Carrège?"

The Magistrate brought the tips of his fingers together, and half
closed his eyes.

"Shock, bewilderment, horror--these things, yes," he declared
judicially. "Great sorrow--no--I should not say that."

Hercule Poirot spoke once more.

"Permit me to ask, M. Van Aldin, does M. Kettering benefit by the death
of his wife?"

"He benefits to the tune of a couple of millions," said Van Aldin.

"Dollars?"

"Pounds. I settled that sum on Ruth absolutely on her marriage. She
made no will and leaves no children, so the money will go to her
husband."

"Whom she was on the point of divorcing," murmured Poirot. "Ah,
yes--_précisément_."

The Commissary turned and looked sharply at him.

"Do you mean--" he began.

"I mean nothing," said Poirot. "I arrange the facts, that is all."

Van Aldin stared at him with awakening interest.

The little man rose to his feet.

"I do not think I can be of any further service to you, M. le Juge," he
said politely, bowing to M. Carrège. "You will keep me informed of the
course of events? It will be a kindness."

"But certainly--most certainly."

Van Aldin rose also.

"You don't want me any more at present?"

"No, Monsieur; we have all the information we need for the moment."

"Then I will walk a little way with M. Poirot. That is, if he does not
object?"

"Enchanted, Monsieur," said the little man, with a bow.

Van Aldin lighted a large cigar, having first offered one to Poirot,
who declined it and lit one of his own tiny cigarettes. A man of great
strength of character, Van Aldin already appeared to be his everyday,
normal self once more. After strolling along for a minute or two in
silence, the millionaire spoke:

"I take it, M. Poirot, that you no longer exercise your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. I enjoy the world."

"Yet you are assisting the police in this affair?"

"Monsieur, if a doctor walks along the street and an accident happens,
does he say, 'I have retired from my profession, I will continue my
walk,' when there is some one bleeding to death at his feet? If I
had been already in Nice, and the police had sent to me and asked me
to assist them, I should have refused. But this affair, the good God
thrust it upon me."

"You were on the spot," said Van Aldin thoughtfully. "You examined the
compartment, did you not?"

Poirot nodded.

"Doubtless you found things that were, shall we say, suggestive to you?"

"Perhaps," said Poirot.

"I hope you see what I am leading up to?" said Van Aldin. "It seems to
me that the case against this Comte de la Roche is perfectly clear, but
I am not a fool. I have been watching you for this last hour or so, and
I realize that for some reason of your own you don't agree with that
theory?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"I may be wrong."

"So we come to the favour I want to ask you. Will you act in this
matter for me?"

"For you personally?"

"That was my meaning."

Poirot was silent for a moment or two. Then he said:

"You realize what you are asking?"

"I guess so," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said Poirot. "I accept. But in that case, I must have
frank answers to my questions."

"Why, certainly. That is understood."

Poirot's manner changed. He became suddenly brusque and business-like.

"This question of a divorce," he said. "It was you who advised your
daughter to bring the suit?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"About ten days ago. I had had a letter from her complaining of her
husband's behaviour, and I put it to her very strongly that divorce was
the only remedy."

"In what way did she complain of his behaviour?"

"He was being seen about with a _very_ notorious lady--the one we have
been speaking of--Mirelle."

"The dancer. Ah-ha! And Madame Kettering objected? Was she very devoted
to her husband?"

"I would not say that," said Van Aldin, hesitating a little.

"It was not her heart that suffered, it was her pride--is that what you
would say?"

"Yes, I suppose you might put it like that."

"I gather that the marriage had not been a happy one from the
beginning?"

"Derek Kettering is rotten to the core," said Van Aldin. "He is
incapable of making any woman happy."

"He is, as you say in England, a bad lot. That is right, is it not?"

Van Aldin nodded.

"_Très bien!_ You advise Madame to seek a divorce, she agrees; you
consult your solicitors. When does M. Kettering get news of what is in
the wind?"

"I sent for him myself, and explained the course of action I proposed
to take."

"And what did he say?" murmured Poirot softly.

Van Aldin's face darkened at the remembrance.

"He was infernally impudent."

"Excuse the question, Monsieur, but did he refer to the Comte de la
Roche?"

"Not by name," growled the other unwillingly, "but he showed himself
cognizant of the affair."

"What, if I may ask, was M. Kettering's financial position at the time?"

"How do you suppose I should know that?" asked Van Aldin, after a very
brief hesitation.

"It seemed likely to me that you would inform yourself on that point."

"Well--you are quite right, I did. I discovered that Kettering was on
the rocks."

"And now he has inherited two million pounds! _La vie_--it is a strange
thing, is it not?"

Van Aldin looked at him sharply.

"What do you mean?"

"I moralize," said Poirot. "I reflect, I speak the philosophy. But to
return to where we were. Surely M. Kettering did not propose to allow
himself to be divorced without making a fight for it?"

Van Aldin did not answer for a minute or two, then he said:

"I don't exactly know what his intentions were."

"Did you hold any further communications with him?"

Again a slight pause, then Van Aldin said:

"No."

Poirot stopped dead, took off his hat, and held out his hand.

"I must wish you good-day, Monsieur. I can do nothing for you."

"What are you getting at?" demanded Van Aldin angrily.

"If you do not tell me the truth, I can do nothing."

"I don't know what you mean."

"I think you do. You may rest assured, M. Van Aldin, that I know how to
be discreet."

"Very well, then," said the millionaire. "I'll admit that I was not
speaking the truth just now. I _did_ have further communication with my
son-in-law."

"Yes?"

"To be exact, I sent my secretary, Major Knighton, to see him, with
instructions to offer him the sum of one hundred thousand pounds in
cash if the divorce went through undefended."

"A pretty sum of money," said Poirot appreciatively; "and the answer of
Monsieur your son-in-law?"

"He sent back word that I could go to hell," replied the millionaire
succinctly.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

He betrayed no emotion of any kind. At the moment he was engaged in
methodically recording facts.

"Monsieur Kettering has told the police that he neither saw nor spoke
to his wife on the journey from England. Are you inclined to believe
that statement, Monsieur?"

"Yes, I am," said Van Aldin. "He would take particular pains to keep
out of her way, I should say."

"Why?"

"Because he had got that woman with him."

"Mirelle?"

"Yes."

"How did you come to know that fact?"

"A man of mine, whom I had put on to watch him, reported to me that
they had both left by that train."

"I see," said Poirot. "In that case, as you said before, he would not
be likely to attempt to hold any communication with Madame Kettering."

The little man fell silent for some time. Van Aldin did not interrupt
his meditation.




                     17. An Aristocratic Gentleman


"You have been to the Riviera before, Georges?" said Poirot to his
valet the following morning.

George was an intensely English, rather wooden-faced individual.

"Yes, sir. I was here two years ago when I was in the service of Lord
Edward Frampton."

"And to-day," murmured his master, "you are here with Hercule Poirot.
How one mounts in the world!"

The valet made no reply to this observation. After a suitable pause he
asked:

"The brown lounge suit, sir? The wind is somewhat chilly to-day."

"There is a grease spot on the waistcoat," objected Poirot. "A
_morceau_ of _filet de sole à la Jeannette_ alighted there when I was
lunching at the Ritz last Tuesday."

"There is no spot there now, sir," said George reproachfully. "I have
removed it."

"_Très bien!_" said Poirot. "I am pleased with you, Georges."

"Thank you, sir."

There was a pause, and then Poirot murmured dreamily:

"Supposing, my good Georges, that you had been born in the same social
sphere as your late master, Lord Edward Frampton--that, penniless
yourself, you had married an extremely wealthy wife, but that that wife
proposed to divorce you, with excellent reasons, what would you do
about it?"

"I should endeavour, sir," replied George, "to make her change her
mind."

"By peaceful or by forcible methods?"

George looked shocked.

"You will excuse me, sir," he said, "but a gentleman of the aristocracy
would not behave like a Whitechapel coster. He would not do anything
low."

"Would he not, Georges? I wonder now. Well, perhaps you are right."

There was a knock on the door. George went to it and opened it a
discreet inch or two. A low murmured colloquy went on, and then the
valet returned to Poirot.

"A note, sir."

Poirot took it. It was from M. Caux, the Commissary of Police.

"We are about to interrogate the Comte de la Roche. The Juge
d'Instruction begs that you will be present."

"Quickly, my suit, Georges! I must hasten myself."

A quarter of an hour later, spick and span in his brown suit, Poirot
entered the Examining Magistrate's room. M. Caux was already there, and
both he and M. Carrège greeted Poirot with polite _empressement_.

"The affair is somewhat discouraging," murmured M. Caux.

"It appears that the Comte arrived in Nice the day before the murder."

"If that is true, it will settle your affair nicely for you," responded
Poirot.

M. Carrège cleared his throat.

"We must not accept this alibi without very cautious inquiry," he
declared. He struck the bell upon the table with his hand.

In another minute a tall dark man, exquisitely dressed, with a
somewhat haughty cast of countenance, entered the room. So very
aristocratic-looking was the Count, that it would have seemed
sheer heresy even to whisper that his father had been an obscure
corn-chandler in Nantes--which, as a matter of fact, was the case.
Looking at him, one would have been prepared to swear that innumerable
ancestors of his must have perished by the guillotine in the French
Revolution.

"I am here, gentlemen," said the Count haughtily. "May I ask why you
wish to see me?"

"Pray be seated, Monsieur le Comte," said the Examining Magistrate
politely. "It is the affair of the death of Madame Kettering that we
are investigating."

"The death of Madame Kettering? I do not understand."

"You were--ahem!--acquainted with the lady, I believe, Monsieur le
Comte?"

"Certainly I was acquainted with her. What has that to do with the
matter?"

Sticking an eyeglass in his eye, he looked coldly round the room, his
glance resting longest on Poirot, who was gazing at him with a kind of
simple, innocent admiration which was most pleasing to the Count's
vanity. M. Carrège leaned back in his chair and cleared his throat.

"You do not perhaps know, Monsieur le Comte"--he paused--"that Madame
Kettering was murdered?"

"Murdered? _Mon Dieu_, how terrible!"

The surprise and the sorrow were excellently done--so well done,
indeed, as to seem wholly natural.

"Madame Kettering was strangled between Paris and Lyons," continued M.
Carrège, "and her jewels were stolen."

"It is iniquitous!" cried the Count warmly; "the police should do
something about these train bandits. Nowadays no one is safe."

"In Madame's handbag," continued the Judge, "we found a letter to her
from you. She had, it seemed, arranged to meet you?"

The Count shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands.

"Of what use are concealments," he said frankly. "We are all men of the
world. Privately and between ourselves, I admit the affair."

"You met her in Paris and travelled down with her, I believe?" said M.
Carrège.

"That was the original arrangement, but by Madame's wish it was
changed. I was to meet her at Hyères."

"You did not meet her on the train at the Gare de Lyon on the evening
of the 14th?"

"On the contrary, I arrived in Nice on the morning of that day, so what
you suggest is impossible."

"Quite so, quite so," said M. Carrège. "As a matter of form, you would
perhaps give me an account of your movements during the evening and
night of the 14th."

The Count reflected for a minute.

"I dined in Monte Carlo at the Café de Paris. Afterwards I went to the
Le Sporting. I won a few thousand francs," he shrugged his shoulders.
"I returned home at perhaps one o'clock."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but how did you return home?"

"In my own two-seater car."

"No one was with you?"

"No one."

"You could produce witnesses in support of this statement?"

"Doubtless many of my friends saw me there that evening. I dined alone."

"Your servant admitted you on your return to your villa?"

"I let myself in with my own latch-key."

"Ah!" murmured the Magistrate.

Again he struck the bell on the table with his hand. The door opened,
and a messenger appeared.

"Bring in the maid, Mason," said M. Carrège.

"Very good, Monsieur le Juge."

Ada Mason was brought in.

"Will you be so good, Mademoiselle, as to look at this gentleman.
To the best of your ability was it he who entered your mistress's
compartment in Paris?"

The woman looked long and searchingly at the Count, who was, Poirot
fancied, rather uneasy under this scrutiny.

"I could not say, sir, I am sure," said Mason at last. "It might be and
again it might not. Seeing as how I only saw his back, it's hard to
say. I rather think it _was_ the gentleman."

"But you are not sure?"

"No--o," said Mason unwillingly; "n--no, I am not sure."

"You have seen this gentleman before in Curzon Street?"

Mason shook her head.

"I should not be likely to see any visitors that come to Curzon
Street," she explained, "unless they were staying in the house."

"Very well, that will do," said the Examining Magistrate sharply.

Evidently he was disappointed.

"One moment," said Poirot. "There is a question I would like to put to
Mademoiselle, if I may?"

"Certainly, M. Poirot--certainly, by all means."

Poirot addressed himself to the maid.

"What happened to the tickets?"

"The tickets, sir?"

"Yes; the tickets from London to Nice. Did you or your mistress have
them?"

"The mistress had her own Pullman ticket, sir; the others were in my
charge."

"What happened to them?"

"I gave them to the conductor on the French train, sir; he said it was
usual. I hope I did right, sir?"

"Oh, quite right, quite right. A mere matter of detail."

Both M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate looked at him curiously.
Mason stood uncertainly for a minute or two, and then the Magistrate
gave her a brief nod of dismissal, and she went out. Poirot scribbled
something on a scrap of paper and handed it across to M. Carrège. The
latter read it and his brow cleared.

"Well, gentlemen," demanded the Count haughtily, "am I to be detained
further?"

"Assuredly not, assuredly not," M. Carrège hastened to say, with a
great deal of amiability. "Everything is now cleared up as regards your
own position in this affair. Naturally, in view of Madame's letter, we
were bound to question you."

The Count rose, picked up his handsome stick from the corner, and, with
rather a curt bow, left the room.

"And that is that," said M. Carrège. "You were quite right, M.
Poirot--much better to let him feel he is not suspected. Two of my men
will shadow him night and day, and at the same time we will go into the
question of the alibi. It seems to me rather--er--a fluid one."

"Possibly," agreed Poirot thoughtfully.

"I asked M. Kettering to come here this morning," continued the
Magistrate, "though really I doubt if we have much to ask him, but
there are one or two suspicious circumstances--" He paused, rubbing his
nose.

"Such as?" asked Poirot.

"Well"--the Magistrate coughed--"this lady with whom he is said to be
travelling--Mademoiselle Mirelle. She is staying at one hotel and he at
another. That strikes me--er--as rather odd."

"It looks," said M. Caux, "as though they were being careful."

"Exactly," said M. Carrège triumphantly; "and what should they have to
be careful about?"

"An excess of caution is suspicious, eh?" said Poirot.

"_Précisément._"

"We might, I think," murmured Poirot, "ask M. Kettering one or two
questions."

The Magistrate gave instructions. A moment or two later, Derek
Kettering, debonair as ever, entered the room.

"Good morning, Monsieur," said the Judge politely.

"Good morning," said Derek Kettering curtly. "You sent for me. Has
anything fresh turned up?"

"Pray sit down, Monsieur."

Derek took a seat and flung his hat and stick on the table.

"Well?" he asked impatiently.

"We have, so far, no fresh data," said M. Carrège cautiously.

"That's very interesting," said Derek drily. "Did you send for me here
in order to tell me that?"

"We naturally thought, Monsieur, that you would like to be informed of
the progress of the case," said the Magistrate severely.

"Even if the progress was non-existent."

"We also wished to ask you a few questions."

"Ask away."

"You are quite sure that you neither saw nor spoke with your wife on
the train?"

"I've answered that already. I did not."

"You had, no doubt, your reasons."

Derek stared at him suspiciously.

"I--did--not--know--she--was--on--the--train," he explained, spacing
his words elaborately, as though to some one dull of intellect.

"That is what you say, yes," murmured M. Carrège. A frown suffused
Derek's face.

"I should like to know what you're driving at. Do you know what I
think, M. Carrège?"

"What do you think, Monsieur?"

"I think the French police are vastly overrated. Surely you must have
some data as to these gangs of train robbers. It's outrageous that
such a thing could happen on a _train de luxe_ like that, and that the
French police should be helpless to deal with the matter."

"We are dealing with it, Monsieur, never fear."

"Madame Kettering, I understand, did not leave a will," interposed
Poirot suddenly. His fingertips were joined together, and he was
looking intently at the ceiling.

"I don't think she ever made one," said Kettering. "Why?"

"It is a very pretty little fortune that you inherit there," said
Poirot--"a very pretty little fortune."

Although his eyes were still on the ceiling, he managed to see the dark
flush that rose to Derek Kettering's face.

"What do you mean, and who are you?"

Poirot gently uncrossed his knees, withdrew his gaze from the ceiling,
and looked the young man full in the face.

"My name is Hercule Poirot," he said quietly, "and I am probably the
greatest detective in the world. You are quite sure that you did not
see or speak to your wife on that train?"

"What are you getting at? Do you--do you mean to insinuate that I--I
killed her?"

He laughed suddenly.

"I mustn't lose my temper; it's too palpably absurd. Why, if I killed
her I should have had no need to steal her jewels, would I?"

"That is true," murmured Poirot, with a rather crestfallen air. "I did
not think of that."

"If ever there were a clear case of murder and robbery, this is it,"
said Derek Kettering. "Poor Ruth, it was those damned rubies did for
her. It must have got about she had them with her. There has been
murder done for those same stones before now, I believe."

Poirot sat up suddenly in his chair. A very faint green light glowed in
his eyes. He looked extraordinarily like a sleek, well-fed cat.

"One more question, M. Kettering," he said. "Will you give me the date
when you last saw your wife?"

"Let me see," Kettering reflected. "It must have been--yes over three
weeks ago. I am afraid I can't give you the date exactly."

"No matter," said Poirot drily; "that is all I wanted to know."

"Well," said Derek Kettering impatiently, "anything further?"

He looked towards M. Carrège. The latter sought inspiration from
Poirot, and received it in a very faint shake of the head.

"No, M. Kettering," he said politely; "no, I do not think we need
trouble you any further. I wish you good morning."

"Good morning," said Kettering. He went out, banging the door behind
him.

Poirot leaned forward and spoke sharply, as soon as the young man was
out of the room.

"Tell me," he said peremptorily, "when did you speak of these rubies to
M. Kettering?"

"I have not spoken of them," said M. Carrège. "It was only yesterday
afternoon that we learnt about them from M. Van Aldin."

"Yes; but there was a mention of them in the Comte's letter."

M. Carrège looked pained.

"Naturally I did not speak of that letter to M. Kettering," he said in
a shocked voice. "It would have been most indiscreet at the present
juncture of affairs."

Poirot leaned forward and tapped the table.

"_Then how did he know about them?_" he demanded softly. "Madame could
not have told him, for he has not seen her for three weeks. It seems
unlikely that either M. Van Aldin or his secretary would have mentioned
them; their interviews with him have been on entirely different lines,
and there has not been any hint or reference to them in the newspapers."

He got up and took his hat and stick.

"And yet," he murmured to himself, "our gentleman knows all about them.
I wonder now, yes, I wonder!"




                           18. Derek Lunches


Derek Kettering went straight to the Negresco, where he ordered a
couple of cocktails and disposed of them rapidly; then he stared
moodily out over the dazzling blue sea. He noted the passers-by
mechanically--a damned dull crowd, badly dressed, and painfully
uninteresting; one hardly ever saw anything worth while nowadays. Then
he corrected this last impression rapidly, as a woman placed herself at
a table a little distance away from him. She was wearing a marvellous
confection of orange and black, with a little hat that shaded her face.
He ordered a third cocktail; again he stared out to sea, and then
suddenly he started. A well-known perfume assailed his nostrils, and he
looked up to see the orange-and-black lady standing beside him. He saw
her face now, and recognized her. It was Mirelle. She was smiling that
insolent, seductive smile he knew so well.

"Dereek!" she murmured. "You are pleased to see me, no?"

She dropped into a seat the other side of the table.

"But welcome me, then, stupid one," she mocked.

"This is an unexpected pleasure," said Derek. "When did you leave
London?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"A day or two ago."

"And the Parthenon?"

"I have, how do you say it?--given them the chuck!"

"Really?"

"You are not very amiable, Dereek."

"Do you expect me to be?"

Mirelle lit a cigarette and puffed at it for a few minutes before
saying:

"You think, perhaps, that it is not prudent so soon?"

Derek stared at her, then he shrugged his shoulders, and remarked
formally:

"You are lunching here?"

"_Mais oui._ I am lunching with you."

"I am extremely sorry," said Derek. "I have a very important
engagement."

"_Mon Dieu!_ But you men are like children," exclaimed the dancer. "But
yes, it is the spoilt child that you act to me ever since that day in
London when you flung yourself out of my flat, you sulk. Ah! _mais
c'est inoui!_"

"My dear girl," said Derek, "I really don't know what you are talking
about. We agreed in London that rats desert a sinking ship, that is all
that there is to be said."

In spite of his careless words, his face looked haggard and strained.
Mirelle leaned forward suddenly.

"You cannot deceive me," she murmured. "I know--I know what you have
done for me."

He looked up at her sharply. Some undercurrent in her voice arrested
his attention. She nodded her head at him.

"Ah! have no fear; I am discreet. You are magnificent! You have a
superb courage, but, all the same, it was I who gave you the idea that
day, when I said to you in London that accidents sometimes happened.
And you are not in danger? The police do not suspect you?"

"What the devil--"

"Hush!"

She held up a slim olive hand with one big emerald on the little finger.

"You are right; I should not have spoken so in a public place. We will
not speak of the matter again, but our troubles are ended; our life
together will be wonderful--wonderful!"

Derek laughed suddenly--a harsh, disagreeable laugh.

"So the rats come back, do they? Two million makes a difference--of
course it does. I ought to have known that." He laughed again. "You
will help me to spend that two million, won't you, Mirelle? You know
how, no woman better." He laughed again.

"Hush!" cried the dancer. "What is the matter with you, Dereek?
See--people are turning to stare at you."

"Me? I will tell you what is the matter. I have finished with you,
Mirelle. Do you hear? Finished!"

Mirelle did not take it as he expected her to do. She looked at him for
a minute or two, and then she smiled softly.

"But what a child! You are angry--you are sore, and all because I am
practical. Did I not always tell you that I adored you?"

She leaned forward.

"But I know you, Dereek. Look at me--see, it is Mirelle who speaks to
you. You cannot live without her, you know it. I loved you before, I
will love you a hundred times more now. I will make life wonderful for
you--but wonderful. There is no one like Mirelle."

Her eyes burned into his. She saw him grow pale and draw in his breath,
and she smiled to herself contentedly. She knew her own magic and power
over men.

"That is settled," she said softly, and gave a little laugh. "And now,
Dereek, will you give me lunch?"

"No."

He drew in his breath sharply and rose to his feet.

"I am sorry, but I told you--I have got an engagement."

"You are lunching with some one else? Bah! I don't believe it."

"I am lunching with that lady over there."

He crossed abruptly to where a lady in white had just come up the
steps. He addressed her a little breathlessly.

"Miss Grey, will you--will you have lunch with me? You met me at Lady
Tamplin's, if you remember."

Katherine looked at him for a minute or two with those thoughtful grey
eyes that said so much.

"Thank you," she said, after a moment's pause; "I should like to very
much."




                       19. An Unexpected Visitor


The Comte de la Roche had just finished _déjeuner_, consisting of an
_omelette fines herbes_, an _entrecôte Béarnaise_, and a _Savarin
au Rhum_. Wiping his fine black moustache delicately with his table
napkin, the Comte rose from the table. He passed through the salon of
the villa, noting with appreciation the few _objets d'art_ which were
carelessly scattered about. The Louis XV snuff-box, the satin shoe
worn by Marie Antoinette, and the other historic trifles were part of
the Comte's _mise en scène_. They were, he would explain to his fair
visitors, heirlooms in his family. Passing through on to the terrace,
the Comte looked out on the Mediterranean with an unseeing eye. He was
in no mood for appreciating the beauties of scenery. A fully matured
scheme had been rudely brought to naught, and his plans had to be cast
afresh. Stretching himself out in a basket chair, a cigarette held
between his white fingers, the Comte pondered deeply.

Presently Hippolyte, his man-servant, brought out coffee and a choice
of liqueurs. The Comte selected some very fine old brandy.

As the man-servant was preparing to depart, the Comte arrested him
with a slight gesture. Hippolyte stood respectfully to attention. His
countenance was hardly a prepossessing one, but the correctitude of his
demeanour went far to obliterate the fact. He was now the picture of
respectful attention.

"It is possible," said the Comte, "that in the course of the next few
days various strangers may come to the house. They will endeavour to
scrape acquaintance with you and with Marie. They will probably ask you
various questions concerning me."

"Yes, Monsieur le Comte."

"Perhaps this has already happened?"

"No, Monsieur le Comte."

"There have been no strangers about the place? You are certain?"

"There has been no one, Monsieur le Comte."

"That is well," said the Comte drily; "nevertheless they will come--I
am sure of it. They will ask questions."

Hippolyte looked at his master in intelligent anticipation.

The Comte spoke slowly, without looking at Hippolyte.

"As you know, I arrived here last Tuesday morning. If the police or any
other inquirer should question you, do not forget that fact. I arrived
on Tuesday, the 14th--not Wednesday, the 15th. You understand?"

"Perfectly, Monsieur le Comte."

"In an affair where a lady is concerned, it is always necessary to be
discreet. I feel certain, Hippolyte, that you can be discreet."

"I can be discreet, Monsieur."

"And Marie?"

"Marie also. I will answer for her."

"That is well then," murmured the Comte.

When Hippolyte had withdrawn, the Comte sipped his black coffee with
a reflective air. Occasionally he frowned, once he shook his head
slightly, twice he nodded it. Into the midst of these cogitations came
Hippolyte once more.

"A lady, Monsieur."

"A lady?"

The Comte was surprised. Not that a visit from a lady was an unusual
thing at the Villa Marina, but at this particular moment the Comte
could not think who the lady was likely to be.

"She is, I think, a lady not known to Monsieur," murmured the valet
helpfully.

The Comte was more and more intrigued.

"Show her out here, Hippolyte," he commanded.

A moment later a marvellous vision in orange and black stepped out on
the terrace, accompanied by a strong perfume of exotic blossoms.

"Monsieur le Comte de la Roche?"

"At your service, Mademoiselle," said the Comte, bowing.

"My name is Mirelle. You may have heard of me."

"Ah, indeed, Mademoiselle, but who has not been enchanted by the
dancing of Mademoiselle Mirelle? Exquisite!"

The dancer acknowledged this compliment with a brief mechanical smile.

"My descent upon you is unceremonious," she began.

"But seat yourself, I beg of you, Mademoiselle," cried the Comte,
bringing forward a chair.

Behind the gallantry of his manner he was observing her narrowly. There
were very few things that the Comte did not know about women. True, his
experience had not lain much in ladies of Mirelle's class, who were
themselves predatory. He and the dancer were, in a sense, birds of a
feather. His arts, the Comte knew, would be thrown away on Mirelle. She
was a Parisienne, and a shrewd one. Nevertheless, there was one thing
that the Comte could recognize infallibly when he saw it. He knew at
once that he was in the presence of a very angry woman, and an angry
woman, as the Comte was well aware, always says more than is prudent,
and is occasionally a source of profit to a level-headed gentleman who
keeps cool.

"It is most amiable of you, Mademoiselle, to honour my poor abode thus."

"We have mutual friends in Paris," said Mirelle. "I have heard of you
from them, but I come to see you to-day for another reason. I have
heard of you since I came to Nice--in a different way, you understand."

"Ah?" said the Comte softly.

"I will be brutal," continued the dancer; "nevertheless, believe that I
have your welfare at heart. They are saying in Nice, Monsieur le Comte,
that you are the murderer of the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"I!--the murderer of Madame Kettering? Bah! But how absurd!"

He spoke more languidly than indignantly, knowing that he would thus
provoke her further.

"But yes," she insisted; "it is as I tell you."

"It amuses people to talk," murmured the Comte indifferently. "It would
be beneath me to take such wild accusations seriously."

"You do not understand." Mirelle bent forward, her dark eyes flashing.
"It is not the idle talk of those in the streets. It is the police."

"The police--ah?"

The Comte sat up, alert once more.

Mirelle nodded her head vigorously several times.

"Yes, yes. You comprehend me--I have friends every where. The Prefect
himself--" She left the sentence unfinished, with an eloquent shrug of
the shoulders.

"Who is not indiscreet where a beautiful woman is concerned?" murmured
the Count politely.

"The police believe that you killed Madame Kettering. But they are
wrong."

"Certainly they are wrong," agreed the Comte easily.

"You say that, but you do not know the truth. I do."

The Comte looked at her curiously.

"You know who killed Madame Kettering? Is that what you would say,
Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle nodded vehemently.

"Yes."

"Who was it?" asked the Comte sharply.

"Her husband." She bent nearer to the Comte, speaking in a low voice
that vibrated with anger and excitement. "It was her husband who killed
her."

The Comte leant back in his chair. His face was a mask.

"Let me ask you, Mademoiselle--how do you know this?"

"How do I know it?" Mirelle sprang to her feet, with a laugh. "He
boasted of it beforehand. He was ruined, bankrupt, dishonoured. Only
the death of his wife could save him. He told me so. He travelled
on the same train--but she was not to know it. Why was that, I ask
you? So that he might creep upon her in the night--Ah!"--she shut her
eyes--"I can see it happening...."

The Count coughed.

"Perhaps--perhaps," he murmured. "But surely, Mademoiselle, in that
case he would not steal the jewels?"

"The jewels!" breathed Mirelle. "The jewels. Ah! Those rubies...."

Her eyes grew misty, a far-away light in them. The Comte looked at her
curiously, wondering for the hundredth time at the magical influence of
precious stones on the female sex. He recalled her to practical matters.

"What do you want me to do, Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle became alert and business-like once more.

"Surely it is simple. You will go to the police. You will say to them
that M. Kettering committed this crime."

"And if they do not believe me? If they ask for proof?" He was eyeing
her closely.

Mirelle laughed softly, and drew her orange-and-black wrap closer round
her.

"Send them to me, Monsieur le Comte," she said softly; "I will give
them the proof they want."

Upon that she was gone, an impetuous whirlwind, her errand accomplished.

The Comte looked after her, his eyebrows delicately raised.

"She is in a fury," he murmured. "What has happened now to upset her?
But she shows her hand too plainly. Does she really believe that Mr.
Kettering killed his wife? She would like me to believe it. She would
even like the police to believe it."

He smiled to himself. He had no intention whatsoever of going to the
police. He saw various other possibilities, to judge by his smile, an
agreeable vista of them.

Presently, however, his brow clouded. According to Mirelle, he was
suspected by the police. That might be true or it might not. An
angry woman of the type of the dancer was not likely to bother about
the strict veracity of her statements. On the other hand, she might
easily have obtained--inside information. In that case--his mouth set
grimly--in that case he must take certain precautions.

He went into the house and questioned Hippolyte closely once more as
to whether any strangers had been to the house. The valet was positive
in his assurances that this was not the case. The Comte went up to
his bedroom and crossed over to an old bureau that stood against the
wall. He let down the lid of this, and his delicate fingers sought for
a spring at the back of one of the pigeon-holes. A secret drawer flew
out; in it was a small brown paper package. The Comte took this out and
weighed it in his hand carefully for a minute or two. Raising his hand
to his head, with a slight grimace he pulled out a single hair. This he
placed on the lip of the drawer and shut it carefully. Still carrying
the small parcel in his hand, he went downstairs and out of the house
to the garage, where stood a scarlet two-seater car. Ten minutes later
he had taken the road for Monte Carlo.

He spent a few hours at the Casino, then sauntered out into the town.
Presently he re-entered the car and drove off in the direction of
Mentone. Earlier in the afternoon he had noticed an inconspicuous grey
car some little distance behind him. He noticed it again now. He smiled
to himself. The road was climbing steadily upwards. The Comte's foot
pressed hard on the accelerator. The little red car had been specially
built to the Comte's design, and had a far more powerful engine than
would have been suspected from its appearance. It shot ahead.

Presently he looked back and smiled; the grey car was following
behind. Smothered in dust, the little red car leaped along the road.
It was travelling now at a dangerous pace, but the Comte was a
first-class driver. Now they were going down hill, twisting and curving
unceasingly. Presently the car slackened speed, and finally came to
a standstill before a Bureau de Poste. The Comte jumped out, lifted
the lid of the tool chest, extracted the small brown paper parcel and
hurried into the post office. Two minutes later he was driving once
more in the direction of Mentone. When the grey car arrived there, the
Comte was drinking English five o'clock tea on the terrace of one of
the hotels.

Later, he drove back to Monte Carlo, dined there, and reached home once
more at eleven o'clock. Hippolyte came out to meet him with a disturbed
face.

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte has arrived. Monsieur le Comte did not telephone
me, by any chance?"

The Comte shook his head.

"And yet at three o'clock I received a summons from Monsieur le Comte,
to present myself to him at Nice, at the Negresco."

"Really," said the Comte; "and you went?"

"Certainly, Monsieur, but at the Negresco they knew nothing of Monsieur
le Comte. He had not been there."

"Ah," said the Comte, "doubtless at that hour Marie was out doing her
afternoon marketing?"

"That is so, Monsieur le Comte."

"Ah, well," said the Comte, "it is of no importance. A mistake."

He went upstairs, smiling to himself.

Once within his own room, he bolted his door and looked sharply round.
Everything seemed as usual. He opened various drawers and cupboards.
Then he nodded to himself. Things had been replaced almost exactly as
he had left them, but not quite. It was evident that a very thorough
search had been made.

He went over to the bureau and pressed the hidden spring. The drawer
flew open, but the hair was no longer where he had placed it. He nodded
his head several times.

"They are excellent, our French police," he murmured to
himself--"excellent. Nothing escapes them."




                     20. Katherine Makes a Friend


On the following morning Katherine and Lenox were sitting on the
terrace of the Villa Marguerite. Something in the nature of a
friendship was springing up between them, despite the difference in
age. But for Lenox, Katherine would have found life at the Villa
Marguerite quite intolerable. The Kettering case was the topic of the
moment. Lady Tamplin frankly exploited her guest's connection with the
affair for all it was worth. The most persistent rebuffs that Katherine
could administer quite failed to pierce Lady Tamplin's self-esteem.
Lenox adopted a detached attitude, seemingly amused at her mother's
manœuvres, and yet with a sympathetic understanding of Katherine's
feelings. The situation was not helped by Chubby, whose naïve delight
was unquenchable, and who introduced Katherine to all and sundry as:

"This is Miss Grey. You know that Blue Train business? She was in it up
to the ears! Had a long talk with Ruth Kettering a few hours before the
murder! Bit of luck for her, eh?"

A few remarks of this kind had provoked Katherine that morning to an
unusually tart rejoinder, and when they were alone together Lenox
observed in her slow drawl:

"Not used to exploitation, are you? You have a lot to learn, Katherine."

"I am sorry I lost my temper. I don't, as a rule."

"It is about time you learnt to blow off steam. Chubby is only an ass;
there is no harm in him. Mother, of course, is trying, but you can
lose your temper with her until Kingdom come, and it won't make any
impression. She will open large, sad blue eyes at you and not care a
bit."

Katherine made no reply to this filial observation, and Lenox presently
went on:

"I am rather like Chubby. I delight in a good murder, and
besides--well, knowing Derek makes a difference."

Katherine nodded.

"So you lunched with him yesterday," pursued Lenox reflectively. "Do
you like him, Katherine?"

Katherine considered for a minute or two.

"I don't know," she said very slowly.

"He is very attractive."

"Yes, he is attractive."

"What don't you like about him?"

Katherine did not reply to the question, or at any rate not directly.
"He spoke of his wife's death," she said. "He said he would not pretend
that it had been anything but a bit of most marvellous luck for him."

"And that shocked you, I suppose," said Lenox. She paused, and then
added in rather a queer tone of voice: "He likes you, Katherine."

"He gave me a very good lunch," said Katherine, smiling.

Lenox refused to be side-tracked.

"I saw it the night he came here," she said thoughtfully. "The way he
looked at you; and you are not his usual type--just the opposite. Well,
I suppose it is like religion--you get it at a certain age."

"Mademoiselle is wanted at the telephone," said Marie, appearing at the
window of the salon. "M. Hercule Poirot desires to speak with her."

"More blood and thunder. Go on, Katherine; go and dally with your
detective."

M. Hercule Poirot's voice came neat and precise in its intonation to
Katherine's ear.

"That is Mademoiselle Grey who speaks? _Bon._ Mademoiselle, I have a
word for you from M. Van Aldin, the father of Madame Kettering. He
wishes very much to speak with you, either at the Villa Marguerite or
at his hotel, whichever you prefer."

Katherine reflected for a moment, but she decided that for Van Aldin
to come to the Villa Marguerite would be both painful and unnecessary.
Lady Tamplin would have hailed his advent with far too much delight.
She never lost a chance of cultivating millionaires. She told Poirot
that she would much rather come to Nice.

"Excellent, Mademoiselle. I will call for you myself in an auto. Shall
we say in about three-quarters of an hour?"

Punctually to the moment Poirot appeared. Katherine was waiting for
him, and they drove off at once.

"Well, Mademoiselle, how goes it?"

She looked at his twinkling eyes, and was confirmed in her first
impression that there was something very attractive about M. Hercule
Poirot.

"This is our own Roman Policier, is it not?" said Poirot. "I made you
the promise that we should study it together. And me, I always keep my
promises."

"You are too kind," murmured Katherine.

"Ah, you mock yourself at me; but do you want to hear the developments
of the case, or do you not?"

Katherine admitted that she did, and Poirot proceeded to sketch for her
a thumbnail portrait of the Comte de la Roche.

"You think he killed her," said Katherine thoughtfully.

"That is the theory," said Poirot guardedly.

"Do you yourself believe that?"

"I did not say so. And you, Mademoiselle, what do you think?"

Katherine shook her head.

"How should I know? I don't know anything about those things, but I
should say that--"

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"Well--from what you say the Count does not sound the kind of man who
would actually kill anybody."

"Ah! Very good," cried Poirot, "you agree with me; that is just what I
have said." He looked at her sharply. "But tell me, you have met Mr.
Derek Kettering?"

"I met him at Lady Tamplin's, and I lunched with him yesterday."

"A _mauvais sujet_," said Poirot, shaking his head; "but _les
femmes_--they like that, eh?"

He twinkled at Katherine and she laughed.

"He is the kind of man one would notice anywhere," continued Poirot.
"Doubtless you observed him on the Blue Train?"

"Yes, I noticed him."

"In the restaurant car?"

"No. I didn't notice him at meals at all. I only saw him once--going
into his wife's compartment."

Poirot nodded. "A strange business," he murmured. "I believe you said
you were awake, Mademoiselle, and looked out of your window at Lyons?
You saw no tall dark man such as the Comte de la Roche leave the train?"

Katherine shook her head. "I don't think I saw any one at all," she
said. "There was a youngish lad in a cap and overcoat who got out, but
I don't think he was leaving the train, only walking up and down the
platform. There was a fat Frenchman with a beard, in pyjamas and an
overcoat, who wanted a cup of coffee. Otherwise, I think there were
only the train attendants."

Poirot nodded his head several times. "It is like this, you see," he
confided, "the Comte de la Roche has an alibi. An alibi, it is a very
pestilential thing, and always open to the gravest suspicion. But here
we are!"

They went straight up to Van Aldin's suite, where they found Knighton.
Poirot introduced him to Katherine. After a few commonplaces had been
exchanged, Knighton said, "I will tell Mr. Van Aldin that Miss Grey is
here."

He went through a second door into an adjoining room. There was a low
murmur of voices, and then Van Aldin came into the room and advanced
towards Katherine with outstretched hand, giving her at the same time a
shrewd and penetrating glance.

"I am pleased to meet you, Miss Grey," he said simply. "I have been
wanting very badly to hear what you can tell me about Ruth."

The quiet simplicity of the millionaire's manner appealed to Katherine
strongly. She felt herself in the presence of a very genuine grief, the
more real for its absence of outward sign.

He drew forward a chair.

"Sit here, will you, and just tell me all about it."

Poirot and Knighton retired discreetly into the other room, and
Katherine and Van Aldin were left alone together. She found no
difficulty in her task. Quite simply and naturally she related her
conversation with Ruth Kettering, word for word as nearly as she
could. He listened in silence, leaning back in his chair, with one hand
shading his eyes. When she had finished he said quietly:

"Thank you, my dear."

They both sat silent for a minute or two. Katherine felt that words of
sympathy would be out of place. When the millionaire spoke, it was in a
different tone:

"I am very grateful to you, Miss Grey. I think you did something to
ease my poor Ruth's mind in the last hours of her life. Now I want
to ask you something. You know--M. Poirot will have told you--about
the scoundrel that my poor girl had got herself mixed up with. He was
the man of whom she spoke to you--the man she was going to meet. In
your judgment do you think she might have changed her mind after her
conversation with you? Do you think she meant to go back on her word?"

"I can't honestly tell you. She had certainly come to some decision,
and seemed more cheerful in consequence of it."

"She gave you no idea where she intended to meet the skunk--whether in
Paris or at Hyères?"

Katherine shook her head.

"She said nothing as to that."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "and that is the important point.
Well, time will show."

He got up and opened the door of the adjoining room. Poirot and
Knighton came back.

Katherine declined the millionaire's invitation to lunch, and Knighton
went down with her and saw her into the waiting car. He returned to
find Poirot and Van Aldin deep in conversation.

"If we only knew," said the millionaire thoughtfully, "what decision
Ruth came to. It might have been any of half a dozen. She might have
meant to leave the train at Paris and cable to me. She may have meant
to have gone on to the south of France and have an explanation with the
Count there. We are in the dark--absolutely in the dark. But we have
the maid's word for it that she was both startled and dismayed at the
Count's appearance at the station in Paris. That was clearly not part
of the preconceived plan. You agree with me, Knighton?"

The secretary started. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Van Aldin. I was not
listening."

"Day-dreaming, eh?" said Van Aldin. "That's not like you. I believe
that girl has bowled you over."

Knighton blushed.

"She is a remarkably nice girl," said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "very
nice. Did you happen to notice her eyes?"

"Any man," said Knighton, "would be bound to notice her eyes."




                           21. At the Tennis


Several days had elapsed. Katherine had been for a walk by herself one
morning, and came back to find Lenox grinning at her expectantly.

"Your young man has been ringing you up, Katherine!"

"Who do you call my young man?"

"A new one--Rufus Van Aldin's secretary. You seem to have made rather
an impression there. You are becoming a serious breaker of hearts,
Katherine. First Derek Kettering, and now this young Knighton. The
funny thing is, that I remember him quite well. He was in Mother's War
Hospital that she ran out here. I was only a kid of about eight at the
time."

"Was he badly wounded?"

"Shot in the leg, if I remember rightly--rather a nasty business. I
think the doctors messed it up a bit. They said he wouldn't limp or
anything, but when he left here he was still completely dot and go one."

Lady Tamplin came out and joined them.

"Have you been telling Katherine about Major Knighton?" she asked.
"Such a dear fellow! Just at first I didn't remember him--one had so
many--but now it all comes back."

"He was a bit too unimportant to be remembered before," said Lenox.
"Now that he is a secretary to an American millionaire, it is a very
different matter."

"Darling!" said Lady Tamplin in her vague reproachful voice.

"What did Major Knighton ring up about?" inquired Katherine.

"He asked if you would like to go to the tennis this afternoon. If so,
he would call for you in a car. Mother and I accepted for you with
_empressement_. Whilst you dally with a millionaire's secretary, you
might give me a chance with the millionaire, Katherine. He is about
sixty, I suppose, so that he will be looking about for a nice sweet
young thing like me."

"I should like to meet Mr. Van Aldin," said Lady Tamplin earnestly;
"one has heard so much of him. Those fine rugged figures of the Western
world"--she broke off--"so fascinating," she murmured.

"Major Knighton was very particular to say it was Mr. Van Aldin's
invitation," said Lenox. "He said it so often that I began to smell a
rat. You and Knighton would make a very nice pair, Katherine. Bless
you, my children!"

Katherine laughed, and went upstairs to change her clothes.

Knighton arrived soon after lunch and endured manfully Lady Tamplin's
transports of recognition.

When they were driving together towards Cannes he remarked to
Katherine: "Lady Tamplin has changed wonderfully little."

"In manner or appearance?"

"Both. She must be, I suppose, well over forty, but she is a remarkably
beautiful woman still."

"She is," agreed Katherine.

"I am very glad that you could come to-day," went on Knighton. "M.
Poirot is going to be there also. What an extraordinary little man he
is. Do you know him well, Miss Grey?"

Katherine shook her head. "I met him on the train on the way here. I
was reading a detective novel, and I happened to say something about
such things not happening in real life. Of course, I had no idea of who
he was."

"He is a very remarkable person," said Knighton slowly, "and has done
some very remarkable things. He has a kind of genius for going to the
root of the matter, and right up to the end no one has any idea of
what he is really thinking. I remember I was staying at a house in
Yorkshire, and Lady Clanravon's jewels were stolen. It seemed at first
to be a simple robbery, but it completely baffled the local police. I
wanted them to call in Hercule Poirot, and said he was the only man who
could help them, but they pinned their faith to Scotland Yard."

"And what happened?" said Katherine curiously.

"The jewels were never recovered," said Knighton drily.

"You really do believe in him?"

"I do indeed. The Comte de la Roche is a pretty wily customer. He
has wriggled out of most things. But I think he has met his match in
Hercule Poirot."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine thoughtfully; "so you really
think he did it?"

"Of course." Knighton looked at her in astonishment. "Don't you?"

"Oh yes," said Katherine hastily; "that is, I mean, if it was not just
an ordinary train robbery."

"It might be, of course," agreed the other, "but it seems to me that
the Comte de la Roche fits into this business particularly well."

"And yet he has an alibi."

"Oh, alibis!" Knighton laughed, his face broke into his attractive
boyish smile.

"You confess that you read detective stories, Miss Grey. You must know
that any one who has a perfect alibi is always open to grave suspicion."

"Do you think that real life is like that?" asked Katherine, smiling.

"Why not? Fiction is founded on fact."

"But is rather superior to it," suggested Katherine.

"Perhaps. Anyway, if I was a criminal I should not like to have Hercule
Poirot on my track."

"No more should I," said Katherine, and laughed.

They were met on arrival by Poirot. As the day was warm he was attired
in a white duck suit, with a white camellia in his buttonhole.

"_Bon jour_, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "I look very English, do I
not?"

"You look wonderful," said Katherine tactfully.

"You mock yourself at me," said Poirot genially, "but no matter. Papa
Poirot, he always laughs the last."

"Where is Mr. Van Aldin?" asked Knighton.

"He will meet us at our seats. To tell you the truth, my friend, he
is not too well pleased with me. Oh, those Americans--the repose, the
calm, they know it not! Mr. Van Aldin, he would that I fly myself in
the pursuit of criminals through all the byways of Nice."

"I should have thought myself that it would not have been a bad plan,"
observed Knighton.

"You are wrong," said Poirot; "in these matters one needs not energy
but finesse. At the tennis one meets every one. That is so important.
Ah, there is Mr. Kettering."

Derek came abruptly up to them. He looked reckless and angry, as though
something had arisen to upset him. He and Knighton greeted each other
with some frigidity. Poirot alone seemed unconscious of any sense of
strain, and chatted pleasantly in a laudable attempt to put every one
at his ease. He paid little compliments.

"It is amazing, M. Kettering, how well you speak the French," he
observed--"so well that you could be taken for a Frenchman if you
chose. That is a very rare accomplishment among Englishmen."

"I wish I did," said Katherine. "I am only too well aware that my
French is of a painfully British order."

They reached their seats and sat down, and almost immediately Knighton
perceived his employer signaling to him from the other end of the
court, and went off to speak to him.

"Me, I approve of that young man," said Poirot, sending a beaming smile
after the departing secretary; "and you, Mademoiselle?"

"I like him very much."

"And you, M. Kettering?"

Some quick rejoinder was springing to Derek's lips, but he checked it
as though something in the little Belgian's twinkling eyes had made him
suddenly alert. He spoke carefully, choosing his words.

"Knighton is a very good fellow," he said.

Just for a moment Katherine fancied that Poirot looked disappointed.

"He is a great admirer of yours, M. Poirot," she said, and she related
some of the things that Knighton had said. It amused her to see the
little man plume himself like a bird, thrusting out his chest, and
assuming an air of mock modesty that would have deceived no one.

"That reminds me, Mademoiselle," he said suddenly, "I have a little
matter of business I have to speak to you about. When you were sitting
talking to that poor lady in the train, I think you must have dropped a
cigarette case."

Katherine looked rather astonished. "I don't think so," she said.
Poirot drew from his pocket a cigarette case of soft blue leather, with
the initial "K" on it in gold.

"No, that is not mine," Katherine said.

"Ah, a thousand apologies. It was doubtless Madame's own. 'K,' of
course, stands for Kettering. We were doubtful, because she had another
cigarette case in her bag, and it seemed odd that she should have two."
He turned to Derek suddenly. "You do not know, I suppose, whether this
was your wife's case or not?"

Derek seemed momentarily taken aback. He stammered a little in his
reply: "I--I don't know. I suppose so."

"It is not yours by any chance?"

"Certainly not. If it were mine it would hardly have been in my wife's
possession."

Poirot looked more ingenuous and childlike than ever.

"I thought perhaps you might have dropped it when you were in your
wife's compartment," he explained guilelessly.

"I never was there. I have already told the police that a dozen times."

"A thousand pardons," said Poirot, with his most apologetic air. "It
was Mademoiselle here who mentioned having seen you going in."

He stopped with an air of embarrassment.

Katherine looked at Derek. His face had gone rather white, but perhaps
that was her fancy. His laugh, when it came, was natural enough.

"You made a mistake, Miss Grey," he said easily. "From what the police
have told me, I gather that my own compartment was only a door or two
away from that of my wife's--though I never suspected the fact at the
time. You must have seen me going into my own compartment." He got up
quickly as he saw Van Aldin and Knighton approaching.

"I'm going to leave you now," he announced. "I can't stand my
father-in-law at any price."

Van Aldin greeted Katherine very courteously, but was clearly in a bad
humour.

"You seem fond of watching tennis, M. Poirot," he growled.

"It is a pleasure to me, yes," cried Poirot placidly.

"It is as well you are in France," said Van Aldin. "We are made of
sterner stuff in the States. Business comes before pleasure there."

Poirot did not take offence; indeed, he smiled gently and confidingly
at the irate millionaire.

"Do not enrage yourself, I beg of you. Every one has his own methods.
Me, I have always found it a delightful and pleasing idea to combine
business and pleasure together."

He glanced at the other two. They were deep in conversation, absorbed
in each other. Poirot nodded his head in satisfaction, and then leant
towards the millionaire, lowering his voice as he did so.

"It is not only for pleasure that I am here, M. Van Aldin. Observe just
opposite us that tall old man--the one with the yellow face and the
venerable beard."

"Well, what of him?"

"That," Poirot said, "is M. Papopolous."

"A Greek, eh?"

"As you say--a Greek. He is a dealer in antiques of world-wide
reputation. He has a small shop in Paris, and he is suspected by the
police of being something more."

"What?"

"A receiver of stolen goods, especially jewels. There is nothing as to
the re-cutting and re-setting of gems that he does not know. He deals
with the highest in Europe and with the lowest of the riff-raff of the
underworld."

Van Aldin was looking at Poirot with suddenly awakened attention.

"Well?" he demanded, a new note in his voice.

"I ask myself," said Poirot, "I, Hercule Poirot"--he thumped himself
dramatically on the chest--"ask myself _why is M. Papopolous suddenly
come to Nice?_"

Van Aldin was impressed. For a moment he had doubted Poirot and
suspected the little man of being past his job, a _poseur_ only. Now,
in a moment, he switched back to his original opinion. He looked
straight at the little detective.

"I must apologize to you, M. Poirot."

Poirot waved the apology aside with an extravagant gesture.

"Bah!" he cried, "all that is of no importance. Now listen, M. Van
Aldin; I have news for you."

The millionaire looked sharply at him, all his interest aroused.

Poirot nodded.

"It is as I say. You will be interested. As you know, M. Van Aldin, the
Comte de la Roche has been under surveillance ever since his interview
with the Juge d'Instruction. The day after that, during his absence,
the Villa Marina was searched by the police."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "did they find anything? I bet they didn't."

Poirot made him a little bow.

"Your acumen is not at fault, M. Van Aldin. They found nothing of an
incriminating nature. It was not to be expected that they would. The
Comte de la Roche, as your expressive idiom has it, was not born on
the preceding day. He is an astute gentleman with great experience."

"Well, go on," growled Van Aldin.

"It may be, of course, that the Comte had nothing of a compromising
nature to conceal. But we must not neglect the possibility. If, then,
he has something to conceal, where is it? Not in his house--the police
searched thoroughly. Not on his person, for he knows that he is liable
to arrest at any minute. There remains--his car. As I say, he was under
surveillance. He was followed on that day to Monte Carlo. From there he
went by road to Mentone, driving himself. His car is a very powerful
one, it outdistanced his pursuers, and for about a quarter of an hour
they completely lost sight of him."

"And during that time you think he concealed something by the
roadside?" asked Van Aldin, keenly interested.

"By the roadside, no. _Ça n'est pas pratique._ But listen now--me, I
have made a little suggestion to M. Carrège. He is graciously pleased
to approve of it. In each Bureau de Poste in the neighbourhood it has
been seen to that there is some one who knows the Comte de la Roche by
sight. Because, you see, Monsieur, the best way of hiding a thing is by
sending it away by the post."

"Well?" demanded Van Aldin; his face was keenly alight with interest
and expectation.

"Well--_voilà!_" With a dramatic flourish Poirot drew out from his
pocket a loosely wrapped brown paper package from which the string had
been removed.

"During that quarter of an hour's interval, our good gentleman mailed
this."

"The address?" asked the other sharply.

Poirot nodded his head.

"Might have told us something, but unfortunately it does not. The
package was addressed to one of these little newspaper shops in Paris
where letters and parcels are kept until called for on payment of a
small commission."

"Yes, but what is inside?" demanded Van Aldin impatiently.

Poirot unwrapped the brown paper and disclosed a square cardboard box.
He looked round him.

"It is a good moment," he said quietly. "All eyes are on the tennis.
Look, Monsieur!"

He lifted the lid of the box for the fraction of a second. An
exclamation of utter astonishment came from the millionaire. His face
turned as white as chalk.

"My God!" he breathed, "the rubies."

He sat for a minute as though dazed. Poirot restored the box to his
pocket and beamed placidly. Then suddenly the millionaire seemed to
come out of his trance; he leaned across to Poirot and wrung his hand
so heartily that the little man winced with pain.

"This is great," said Van Aldin. "Great! You are the goods, M. Poirot.
Once and for all, you are the goods."

"It is nothing," said Poirot modestly. "Order, method, being prepared
for eventualities beforehand--that is all there is to it."

"And now, I suppose, the Comte de la Roche has been arrested?"
continued Van Aldin eagerly.

"No," said Poirot.

A look of utter astonishment came over Van Aldin's face.

"But why? What more do you want?"

"The Comte's alibi is still unshaken."

"But that is nonsense."

"Yes," said Poirot; "I rather think it is nonsense, but unfortunately
we have to prove it so."

"In the meantime he will slip through your fingers."

Poirot shook his head very energetically.

"No," he said, "he will not do that. The one thing the Comte cannot
afford to sacrifice is his social position. At all costs he must stop
and brazen it out."

Van Aldin was still dissatisfied.

"But I don't see--"

Poirot raised a hand. "Grant me a little moment, Monsieur. Me, I have a
little idea. Many people have mocked themselves at the little ideas of
Hercule Poirot--and they have been wrong."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "go ahead. What is this little idea?"

Poirot paused for a moment and then he said:

"I will call upon you at your hotel at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning. Until then, say nothing to any one."




                     22. M. Papopolous Breakfasts


M. Papopolous was at breakfast. Opposite him sat his daughter, Zia.

There was a knock at the sitting-room door, and a chasseur entered with
a card which he brought to Mr. Papopolous. The latter scrutinized it,
raised his eyebrows, and passed it over to his daughter.

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, scratching his left ear thoughtfully,
"Hercule Poirot. I wonder now."

Father and daughter looked at each other.

"I saw him yesterday at the tennis," said M. Papopolous. "Zia, I hardly
like this."

"He was very useful to you once," his daughter reminded him.

"That is true," acknowledged M. Papopolous; "also he has retired from
active work, so I hear."

These interchanges between father and daughter had passed in their own
language. Now M. Papopolous turned to the chasseur and said in French:

"_Faites monter ce monsieur._"

A few minutes later Hercule Poirot, exquisitely attired, and swinging a
cane with a jaunty air, entered the room.

"My dear M. Papopolous."

"My dear M. Poirot."

"And Mademoiselle Zia." Poirot swept her a low bow.

"You will excuse us going on with our breakfast," said M. Papopolous,
pouring himself out another cup of coffee. "Your call is--ahem!--a
little early."

"It is scandalous," said Poirot, "but see you, I am pressed."

"Ah!" murmured M. Papopolous, "you are on an affair then?"

"A very serious affair," said Poirot: "the death of Madame Kettering."

"Let me see," M. Papopolous looked innocently up at the ceiling, "that
was the lady who died on the Blue Train, was it not? I saw a mention of
it in the papers, but there was no suggestion of foul play."

"In the interests of justice," said Poirot, "it was thought best to
suppress that fact."

There was a pause.

"And in what way can I assist you, M. Poirot?" asked the dealer
politely.

"_Voilà_," said Poirot, "I shall come to the point." He took from his
pocket the same box that he had displayed at Cannes, and opening it, he
took out the rubies and pushed them across the table to Papopolous.

Although Poirot was watching him narrowly, not a muscle of the old
man's face moved. He took up the jewels and examined them with a
kind of detached interest, then he looked across at the detective
inquiringly:

"Superb, are they not?" asked Poirot.

"Quite excellent," said M. Papopolous.

"How much should you say they are worth?"

The Greek's face quivered a little.

"Is it really necessary to tell you, M. Poirot?" he asked.

"You are shrewd, M. Papopolous. No, it is not. They are not, for
instance, worth five hundred thousand dollars."

Papopolous laughed, and Poirot joined with him.

"As an imitation," said Papopolous, handing them back to Poirot, "they
are, as I said, quite excellent. Would it be indiscreet to ask, M.
Poirot, where you came across them?"

"Not at all," said Poirot; "I have no objection to telling an old
friend like yourself. They were in the possession of the Comte de la
Roche."

M. Papopolous' eyebrows lifted themselves eloquently.

"In-deed," he murmured.

Poirot leant forward and assumed his most innocent and beguiling air.

"M. Papopolous," he said, "I am going to lay my cards upon the table.
The original of these jewels was stolen from Madame Kettering on the
Blue Train. Now I will say to you first this: _I am not concerned with
the recovery of these jewels. That is the affair of the police._ I am
working not for the police but for M. Van Aldin. I want to lay hands on
the man who killed Madame Kettering. I am interested in the jewels only
in so far as they may lead me to the man. You understand?"

The last two words were uttered with great significance. M. Papopolous,
his face quite unmoved, said quietly:

"Go on."

"It seems to me probable, Monsieur, that the jewels will change hands
in Nice--may already have done so."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous.

He sipped his coffee reflectively, and looked a shade more noble and
patriarchal than usual.

"I say to myself," continued Poirot, with animation, "what good
fortune! My old friend, M. Papopolous, is in Nice. He will aid me."

"And how do you think I can aid you?" inquired M. Papopolous coldly.

"I said to myself, without doubt M. Papopolous is in Nice on business."

"Not at all," said M. Papopolous, "I am here for my health--by the
doctor's orders."

He coughed hollowly.

"I am desolated to hear it," replied Poirot, with somewhat insincere
sympathy. "But to continue. When a Russian Grand Duke, an Austrian
Archduchess, or an Italian Prince wish to dispose of their family
jewels--to whom do they go? To M. Papopolous, is it not? He who is
famous all over the world for the discretion with which he arranges
these things."

The other bowed.

"You flatter me."

"It is a great thing, discretion," mused Poirot, and was rewarded by
the fleeting smile which passed across the Greek's face. "I, too, can
be discreet."

The eyes of the two men met.

Then Poirot went on speaking very slowly, and obviously picking his
words with care.

"I say to myself, this: if these jewels have changed hands in Nice, M.
Papopolous would have heard of it. He has knowledge of all that passes
in the jewel world."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, and helped himself to a _croissant_.

"The police, you understand," said M. Poirot, "do not enter into the
matter. It is a personal affair."

"One hears rumours," admitted M. Papopolous cautiously.

"Such as?" prompted Poirot.

"Is there any reason why I should pass them on?"

"Yes," said Poirot, "I think there is. You may remember, M. Papopolous,
that seventeen years ago there was a certain article in your hands,
left there as security by a very--er--Prominent Person. It was in your
keeping and it unaccountably disappeared. You were, if I may use the
English expression, in the soup."

His eyes came gently round to the girl. She had pushed her cup and
plate aside, and with both elbows on the table and her chin resting on
her hands was listening eagerly. Still keeping an eye on her he went on:

"I am in Paris at the time. You send for me. You place yourself in my
hands. If I restore to you that--article, you say I shall earn your
undying gratitude. _Eh bien!_ I did restore it to you."

A long sigh came from M. Papopolous.

"It was the most unpleasant moment of my career," he murmured.

"Seventeen years is a long time," said Poirot thoughtfully, "but I
believe that I am right in saying, Monsieur, that your race does not
forget."

"A Greek?" murmured Papopolous, with an ironical smile.

"It was not as a Greek I meant," said Poirot.

There was a silence, and then the old man drew himself up proudly.

"You are right, M. Poirot," he said quietly. "I am a Jew. And, as you
say, our race does not forget."

"You will aid me then?"

"As regards the jewels, Monsieur, I can do nothing."

The old man, as Poirot had done just now, picked his words carefully.

"I know nothing. I have heard nothing. But I can perhaps do you a good
turn--that is, if you are interested in racing."

"Under certain circumstances I might be," said Poirot, eyeing him
steadily.

"There is a horse running at Longchamps that would, I think, repay
attention. I cannot say for certain, you understand; this news passed
through so many hands."

He stopped, fixing Poirot with his eye, as though to make sure that the
latter was comprehending him.

"Perfectly, perfectly," said Poirot, nodding.

"The name of the horse," said M. Papopolous, leaning back and joining
the tips of his fingers together, "is the Marquis. I think, but I am
not sure, that it is an English horse, eh, Zia?"

"I think so too," said the girl.

Poirot got up briskly.

"I thank you, Monsieur," he said. "It is a great thing to have what
the English call a tip from the stable. Au revoir, Monsieur, and many
thanks."

He turned to the girl.

"Au revoir, Mademoiselle Zia. It seems to me but yesterday that I saw
you in Paris. One would say that two years had passed at most."

"There is a difference between sixteen and thirty-three," said Zia
ruefully.

"Not in your case," declared Poirot gallantly. "You and your father
will perhaps dine with me one night."

"We shall be delighted," replied Zia.

"Then we will arrange it," declared Poirot, "and now--_je me sauve_."

Poirot walked along the street humming a little tune to himself. He
twirled his stick with a jaunty air, once or twice he smiled to himself
quietly. He turned into the first Bureau de Poste he came to and sent
off a telegram. He took some time in wording it, but it was in code and
he had to call upon his memory. It purported to deal with a missing
scarf-pin, and was addressed to Inspector Japp, Scotland Yard.

Decoded, it was short and to the point. "_Wire me everything known
about man whose soubriquet is the Marquis._"




                           23. A New Theory


It was exactly eleven o'clock when Poirot presented himself at Van
Aldin's hotel. He found the millionaire alone.

"You are punctual, M. Poirot," he said, with a smile, as he rose to
greet the detective.

"I am always punctual," said Poirot. "The exactitude--always do I
observe it. Without order and method--"

He broke off. "Ah, but it is possible that I have said these things to
you before. Let us come at once to the object of my visit."

"Your little idea?"

"Yes, my little idea." Poirot smiled.

"First of all, Monsieur. I should like to interview once more the maid,
Ada Mason. She is here?"

"Yes, she's here."

"Ah!"

Van Aldin looked at him curiously. He rang the bell, and a messenger
was dispatched to find Mason.

Poirot greeted her with his usual politeness, which was never without
effect on that particular class.

"Good afternoon, Mademoiselle," he said cheerfully. "Be seated, will
you not, if Monsieur permits."

"Yes, yes, sit down, my girl," said Van Aldin.

"Thank you, sir," said Mason primly, and she sat down on the extreme
edge of a chair. She looked bonier and more acid than ever.

"I have come to ask you yet more questions," said Poirot. "We must get
to the bottom of this affair. Always I return to the question of the
man in the train. You have been shown the Comte de la Roche. You say
that it is possible he was the man, but you are not sure."

"As I told you, sir, I never saw the gentleman's face. That is what
makes it so difficult."

Poirot beamed and nodded.

"Precisely, exactly. I comprehend well the difficulty. Now,
Mademoiselle, you have been in the service of Madame Kettering two
months, you say. During that time, how often did you see your master?"

Mason reflected a minute or two, and then said:

"Only twice, sir."

"And was that near to, or far away?"

"Well once, sir, he came to Curzon Street. I was upstairs, and I looked
over the banisters and saw him in the hall below. I was a bit curious
like, you understand, knowing the way things--er--were." Mason finished
up with her discreet cough.

"And the other time?"

"I was in the Park, sir, with Annie--one of the housemaids, sir, and
she pointed out the master to me walking with a foreign lady."

Again Poirot nodded.

"Now listen, Mason, this man whom you saw in the carriage talking to
your mistress at the Gare de Lyon, how do you know it was not your
master?"

"The master, sir? Oh, I don't think it could have been."

"But you are not sure," Poirot persisted.

"Well--I never thought of it, sir."

Mason was clearly upset at the idea.

"You have heard that your master was also on the train. What more
natural than that it should be he who came along the corridor."

"But the gentleman who was talking to the mistress must have come from
outside, sir. He was dressed for the street. In an overcoat and soft
hat."

"Just so, Mademoiselle, but reflect a minute. The train has just
arrived at the Gare de Lyon. Many of the passengers promenade
themselves upon the quay. Your mistress was about to do so, and for
that purpose had doubtless put on her fur coat, eh?"

"Yes, sir," agreed Mason.

"Your master, then, does the same. The train is heated, but outside
in the station it is cold. He puts on his overcoat and his hat and he
walks along beside the train, and looking up at the lighted windows
he suddenly sees Madame Kettering. Until then he has had no idea that
she was on the train. Naturally, he mounts the carriage and goes to
her compartment. She gives an exclamation of surprise at seeing him
and quickly shuts the door between the two compartments since it is
possible that their conversation may be of a private nature."

He leaned back in his chair and watched the suggestion slowly take
effect. No one knew better than Hercule Poirot that the class to which
Mason belongs cannot be hurried. He must give her time to get rid of
her own preconceived ideas. At the end of three minutes she spoke:

"Well, of course, sir, it might be so. I never thought of it that way.
The master is tall and dark, and just about that build. It was seeing
the hat and coat that made me say it was a gentleman from outside. Yes,
it might have been the master. I would not like to say either way, I am
sure."

"Thank you very much, Mademoiselle. I shall not require you any
further. Ah, just one thing more." He took from his pocket the
cigarette case he had already shown to Katherine. "Is that your
mistress's case?" he said to Mason.

"No, sir, it is not the mistress's--at least--"

She looked suddenly startled. An idea was clearly working its way to
the forefront of her mind.

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"I think, sir--I can't be sure, but I think--it is a case that the
mistress bought to give to the master."

"Ah," said Poirot in a non-committal manner.

"But whether she ever did give it to him or not, I can't say, of
course."

"Precisely," said Poirot, "precisely. That is all, I think,
Mademoiselle. I wish you good afternoon."

Ada Mason retired discreetly, closing the door noiselessly behind her.

Poirot looked across at Van Aldin, a faint smile upon his face. The
millionaire looked thunderstruck.

"You think--you think it was Derek?" he queried, "but--everything
points the other way. Why, the Count has actually been caught redhanded
with the jewels on him."

"No."

"But you told me--"

"What did I tell you?"

"That story about the jewels. You showed them to me."

"No."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"You mean to say you didn't show them to me."

"No."

"Yesterday--at the tennis?"

"No."

"Are you crazy, M. Poirot, or am I?"

"Neither of us is crazy," said the detective. "You ask me a question;
I answer it. You say have I not shown you the jewels yesterday?
I reply--no. What I showed you, M. Van Aldin, was a first-class
imitation, hardly to be distinguished except by an expert from the real
ones."




                        24. Poirot Gives Advice


It took the millionaire some few minutes to take the thing in. He
stared at Poirot as though dumbfounded. The little Belgian nodded at
him gently.

"Yes," he said, "it alters the position, does it not?"

"Imitation!"

He leaned forward.

"All along, M. Poirot, you have had this idea? All along this is what
you have been driving at? You never believed that the Comte de la Roche
was the murderer?"

"I have had doubts," said Poirot quietly. "I said as much to
you. Robbery with violence and murder"--he shook his head
energetically--"no, it is difficult to picture. It does not harmonize
with the personality of the Comte de la Roche."

"But you believe that he meant to steal the rubies?"

"Certainly. There is no doubt as to that. See, I will recount to you
the affair as I see it. The Comte knew of the rubies and he laid
his plans accordingly. He made up a romantic story of a book he was
writing, so as to induce your daughter to bring them with her. He
provided himself with an exact duplicate. It is clear, is it not,
that substitution is what he was after. Madame, your daughter, was
not an expert on jewels. It would probably be a long time before she
discovered what had occurred. When she did so--well--I do not think she
would prosecute the Comte. Too much would come out. He would have in
his possession various letters of hers. Oh yes, a very safe scheme from
the Comte's point of view--one that he has probably carried out before."

"It seems clear enough, yes," said Van Aldin musingly.

"It accords with the personality of the Comte de la Roche," said Poirot.

"Yes, but now--" Van Aldin looked searchingly at the other. "What
actually happened? Tell me that, M. Poirot."

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"It is quite simple," he said; "some one stepped in ahead of the Comte."

There was a long pause.

Van Aldin seemed to be turning things over in his mind. When he spoke
it was without beating about the bush.

"How long have you suspected my son-in-law, M. Poirot?"

"From the very first. He had the motive and the opportunity. Every one
took for granted that the man in Madame's compartment in Paris was the
Comte de la Roche. I thought so, too. Then you happened to mention
that you had once mistaken the Comte for your son-in-law. That told me
that they were of the same height and build, and alike in colouring.
It put some curious ideas in my head. The maid had only been with
your daughter a short time. It was unlikely that she would know Mr.
Kettering well by sight, since he had not been living in Curzon Street;
also the man was careful to keep his face turned away."

"You believe he--murdered her," said Van Aldin hoarsely.

Poirot raised a hand quickly.

"No, no, I did not say that--but it is a possibility--a very strong
possibility. He was in a tight corner, a very tight corner, threatened
with ruin. This was the one way out."

"But why take the jewels?"

"To make the crime appear an ordinary one committed by train robbers.
Otherwise suspicion might have fallen on him straight away."

"If that is so, what has he done with the rubies?"

"That remains to be seen. There are several possibilities. There is
a man in Nice who may be able to help, the man I pointed out at the
tennis."

He rose to his feet and Van Aldin rose also and laid his hand on the
little man's shoulder. His voice when he spoke was harsh with emotion.

"Find Ruth's murderer for me," he said, "that is all I ask."

Poirot drew himself up.

"Leave it in the hands of Hercule Poirot," he said superbly; "have no
fears. I will discover the truth."

He brushed a speck of fluff from his hat, smiled reassuringly at the
millionaire, and left the room. Nevertheless, as he went down the
stairs some of the confidence faded from his face.

"It is all very well," he murmured to himself, "but there are
difficulties. Yes, there are great difficulties." As he was passing out
of the hotel he came to a sudden halt. A car had drawn up in front of
the door. In it was Katherine Grey, and Derek Kettering was standing
beside it talking to her earnestly. A minute or two later the car drove
off and Derek remained standing on the pavement looking after it. The
expression on his face was an odd one. He gave a sudden impatient
gesture of the shoulders, sighed deeply, and turned to find Hercule
Poirot standing at his elbow. In spite of himself he started. The two
men looked at each other. Poirot steadily and unwaveringly and Derek
with a kind of light-hearted defiance. There was a sneer behind the
easy mockery of his tone when he spoke, raising his eyebrows slightly
as he did so.

"Rather a dear, isn't she?" he asked easily.

His manner was perfectly natural.

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "that describes Mademoiselle Katherine
very well. It is very English, that phrase there, and Mademoiselle
Katherine, she also is very English."

Derek remained perfectly still without answering.

"And yet she is _sympathique_, is it not so?"

"Yes," said Derek; "there are not many like her."

He spoke softly, almost as though to himself. Poirot nodded
significantly. Then he leant towards the other and spoke in a different
tone, a quiet, grave tone that was new to Derek Kettering.

"You will pardon an old man, Monsieur, if he says to you something that
you may consider impertinent. There is one of your English proverbs
that I would quote to you. It says that 'it is well to be off with the
old love, before being on with the new.'"

Kettering turned on him angrily.

"What the devil do you mean?"

"You enrage yourself at me," said Poirot placidly. "I expected as much.
As to what I mean--I mean, Monsieur, that there is a second car with a
lady in it. If you turn your head you will see her."

Derek spun round. His face darkened with anger.

"Mirelle, damn her!" he muttered. "I will soon--"

Poirot arrested the movement he was about to make.

"Is it wise what you are about to do there?" he asked warningly. His
eyes shone softly with a green light in them. But Derek was past
noticing the warning signs. In his anger he was completely off his
guard.

"I have broken with her utterly, and she knows it," cried Derek angrily.

"You have broken with her, yes, but has _she_ broken with you?"

Derek gave a sudden harsh laugh.

"She won't break with two million pounds if she can help it," he
murmured brutally; "trust Mirelle for that."

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

"You have the outlook cynical," he murmured.

"Have I?" There was no mirth in his sudden wide smile. "I have lived
in the world long enough, M. Poirot, to know that all women are pretty
much alike." His face softened suddenly. "All save one."

He met Poirot's gaze defiantly. A look of alertness crept into his
eyes, then faded again. "That one," he said, and jerked his head in the
direction of Cap Martin.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

This quiescence was well calculated to provoke the impetuous
temperament of the other.

"I know what you are going to say," said Derek rapidly, "the kind of
life I have led, the fact that I am not worthy of her. You will say
that I have no right to think even of such a thing. You will say that
it is not a case of giving a dog a bad name--I know that it is not
decent to be speaking like this with my wife dead only a few days, and
murdered at that."

He paused for breath, and Poirot took advantage of the pause to remark
in his plaintive tone:

"But, indeed, I have not said anything at all."

"But you will."

"Eh?" said Poirot.

"You will say that I have no earthly chance of marrying Katherine."

"No," said Poirot, "I would not say that. Your reputation is bad,
yes, but with women--never does that deter them. If you were a man of
excellent character, of strict morality who had done nothing that he
should not do, and--possibly everything that he should do--_eh bien!_
then I should have grave doubts of your success. Moral worth, you
understand, it is not romantic. It is appreciated, however, by widows."

Derek Kettering stared at him, then he swung round on his heel and went
up to the waiting car.

Poirot looked after him with some interest. He saw the lovely vision
lean out of the car and speak.

Derek Kettering did not stop. He lifted his hat and passed straight on.

"_Ça y est_," said M. Hercule Poirot, "it is time, I think, that I
return _chez moi_."

He found the imperturbable George pressing trousers.

"A pleasant day, Georges, somewhat fatiguing, but not without
interest," he said.

George received these remarks in his usual wooden fashion.

"Indeed, sir."

"The personality of a criminal, Georges, is an interesting matter. Many
murderers are men of great personal charm."

"I always heard, sir, that Dr. Crippen was a pleasant-spoken gentleman.
And yet he cut up his wife like so much mincemeat."

"Your instances are always apt, Georges."

The valet did not reply, and at that moment the telephone rang. Poirot
took up the receiver.

"'Allo--'allo--yes, yes, it is Hercule Poirot who speaks."

"This is Knighton. Will you hold the line a minute, M. Poirot? Mr. Van
Aldin would like to speak to you."

There was a moment's pause, then the millionaire's voice came through.

"Is that you, M. Poirot? I just wanted to tell you that Mason came to
me now of her own accord. She has been thinking it over, and she says
that she is almost certain that the man at Paris was Derek Kettering.
There was something familiar about him at the time, she says, but at
the minute she could not place it. She seems pretty certain now."

"Ah," said Poirot, "thank you, M. Van Aldin. That advances us."

He replaced the receiver, and stood for a minute or two with a very
curious smile on his face. George had to speak to him twice before
obtaining an answer.

"Eh?" said Poirot. "What is that that you say to me?"

"Are you lunching here, sir, or are you going out?"

"Neither," said Poirot, "I shall go to bed and take a _tisane_. The
expected has happened, and when the expected happens, it always causes
me emotion."




                             25. Defiance


As Derek Kettering passed the car, Mirelle leant out.

"Dereek--I must speak to you for a moment--"

But, lifting his hat, Derek passed straight on without stopping.

When he got back to his hotel, the concierge detached himself from his
wooden pen and accosted him.

"A gentleman is waiting to see you, Monsieur."

"Who is it?" asked Derek.

"He did not give me his name, Monsieur, but he said his business with
you was important, and that he would wait."

"Where is he?"

"In the little salon, Monsieur. He preferred it to the lounge he said,
as being more private."

Derek nodded, and turned his steps in that direction.

The small salon was empty except for the visitor, who rose and bowed
with easy foreign grace as Derek entered. As it chanced, Derek had
seen the Comte de la Roche only once, but found no difficulty in
recognizing that aristocratic nobleman, and he frowned angrily. Of all
the consummate impertinence!

"The Comte de la Roche, is it not?" he said. "I am afraid you have
wasted your time in coming here."

"I hope not," said the Comte agreeably. His white teeth glittered.

The Comte's charm of manner was usually wasted on his own sex. All men,
without exception, disliked him heartily. Derek Kettering was already
conscious of a distinct longing to kick the Count bodily out of the
room. It was only the realization that scandal would be unfortunate
just at present that restrained him. He marvelled anew that Ruth could
have cared, as she certainly had, for this fellow. A bounder, and worse
than a bounder. He looked with distaste at the Count's exquisitely
manicured hands.

"I called," said the Comte, "on a little matter of business. It would
be advisable, I think, for you to listen to me."

Again Derek felt strongly tempted to kick him out, but again he
refrained. The hint of a threat was not lost upon him, but he
interpreted it in his own way. There were various reasons why it would
be better to hear what the Comte had to say.

He sat down and drummed impatiently with his fingers on the table.

"Well," he said sharply, "what is it?"

It was not the Comte's way to come out into the open at once.

"Allow me, Monsieur, to offer you my condolences on your recent
bereavement."

"If I have any impertinence from you," said Derek quietly, "you go out
by that window."

He nodded his head towards the window beside the Comte, and the latter
moved uneasily.

"I will send my friends to you, Monsieur, if that is what you desire,"
he said haughtily.

Derek laughed.

"A duel, eh? My dear Count, I don't take you seriously enough for that.
But I should take a good deal of pleasure in kicking you down the
Promenade des Anglais."

The Comte was not at all anxious to take offence. He merely raised his
eyebrows and murmured:

"The English are barbarians."

"Well," said Derek, "what is it you have to say to me?"

"I will be frank," said the Comte, "I will come immediately to the
point. That will suit us both, will it not?"

Again he smiled in his agreeable fashion.

"Go on," said Derek curtly.

The Comte looked at the ceiling, joined the tips of his fingers
together, and murmured softly:

"You have come into a lot of money, Monsieur."

"What the devil has that got to do with you?"

The Comte drew himself up.

"Monsieur, my name is tarnished! I am suspected--accused--of foul
crime."

"The accusation does not come from me," said Derek coldly; "as an
interested party I have not expressed any opinion."

"I am innocent," said the Comte, "I swear before heaven"--he raised his
hand to heaven--"that I am innocent."

"M. Carrège is, I believe, the Juge d'Instruction in charge of the
case," hinted Derek politely.

The Comte took no notice.

"Not only am I unjustly suspected of a crime that I did not commit, but
I am also in serious need of money."

He coughed softly and suggestively.

Derek rose to his feet.

"I was waiting for that," he said softly; "you blackmailing brute! I
will not give you a penny. My wife is dead, and no scandal that you can
make can touch her now. She wrote you foolish letters, I dare say. If I
were to buy them from you for a round sum at this minute, I am pretty
certain that you would manage to keep one or two back; and I will tell
you this, M. de la Roche, blackmailing is an ugly word both in England
and in France. That is my answer to you. Good afternoon."

"One moment"--the Comte stretched out a hand as Derek was turning
to leave the room. "You are mistaken, Monsieur. You are completely
mistaken. I am, I hope, a 'gentleman.'" Derek laughed. "Any letters
that a lady might write to me I should hold sacred." He flung back his
head with a beautiful air of nobility. "The proposition that I was
putting before you was of quite a different nature. I am, as I said,
extremely short of money, and my conscience might impel me to go to the
police with certain information."

Derek came slowly back into the room.

"What do you mean?"

The Comte's agreeable smile flashed forth once more.

"Surely it is not necessary to go into details," he purred. "Seek whom
the crime benefits, they say, don't they? As I said just now, you have
come into a lot of money lately."

Derek laughed.

"If that is all--" he said contemptuously.

But the Comte was shaking his head.

"But it is not all, my dear sir. I should not come to you unless I
had much more precise and detailed information than that. It is not
agreeable, Monsieur, to be arrested and tried for murder."

Derek came close up to him. His face expressed such furious anger that
involuntarily the Comte drew back a pace or two.

"Are you threatening _me_?" the young man demanded angrily.

"You shall hear nothing more of the matter," the Comte assured him.

"Of all the colossal bluffs that I have ever struck--"

The Comte raised a white hand.

"You are wrong. It is not a bluff. To convince you I will tell you
this. My information was obtained from a certain lady. It is she who
holds the irrefutable proof that you committed the murder."

"She? Who?"

"Mademoiselle Mirelle."

Derek drew back as though struck.

"Mirelle," he muttered.

The Comte was quick to press what he took to be his advantage.

"A bagatelle of one hundred thousand francs," he said. "I ask no more."

"Eh?" said Derek absently.

"I was saying, Monsieur, that a bagatelle of one hundred thousand
francs would satisfy my--conscience."

Derek seemed to recollect himself. He looked earnestly at the Comte.

"You would like my answer now?"

"If you please, Monsieur."

"Then here it is. You can go to the devil. See?"

Leaving the Comte too astonished to speak, Derek turned on his heel and
swung out of the room.

Once out of the hotel he hailed a taxi and drove to Mirelle's hotel. On
inquiring, he learned that the dancer had just come in. Derek gave the
concierge his card.

"Take this up to Mademoiselle and ask if she will see me."

A very brief interval elapsed, and then Derek was bidden to follow a
_chasseur_.

A wave of exotic perfume assailed Derek's nostrils as he stepped over
the threshold of the dancer's apartments. The room was filled with
carnations, orchids, and mimosa. Mirelle was standing by the window in
a _peignoir_ of foamy lace.

She came towards him, her hands outstretched.

"Dereek--you have come to me. I knew you would."

He put aside the clinging arms and looked down on her sternly.

"Why did you send the Comte de la Roche to me?"

She looked at him in astonishment, which he took to be genuine.

"I? Send the Comte de la Roche to you? But for what?"

"Apparently--for blackmail," said Derek grimly.

Again she stared. Then suddenly she smiled and nodded her head.

"Of course. It was to be expected. It is what he would do, _ce type
là_. I might have known it. No, indeed, Dereek, I did not send him."

He looked at her piercingly, as though seeking to read her mind.

"I will tell you," said Mirelle. "I am ashamed, but I will tell you.
The other day, you comprehend, I was mad with rage, quite mad--" she
made an eloquent gesture. "My temperament, it is not a patient one. I
want to be revenged on you, and so I go to the Comte de la Roche, and
I tell him to go to the police and say so and so, and so and so. But
have no fear, Dereek. Not completely did I lose my head; the proof
rests with me alone. The police can do nothing without my word, you
understand? And now--now?"

She nestled up close to him, looking up at him with melting eyes.

He thrust her roughly away from him. She stood there, her breast
heaving, her eyes narrowing to a cat-like slit.

"Be careful, Dereek, be very careful. You have come back to me, have
you not?"

"I shall never come back to you," said Derek steadily.

"Ah!"

More than ever the dancer looked like a cat. Her eyelids flickered.

"So there is another woman? The one with whom you lunched that day. Eh!
am I right?"

"I intend to ask that lady to marry me. You might as well know."

"That prim Englishwoman! Do you think that I will support that for one
moment? Ah, no." Her beautiful lithe body quivered. "Listen, Dereek,
do you remember that conversation we had in London? You said the only
thing that could save you was the death of your wife. You regretted
that she was so healthy. Then the idea of an accident came to your
brain. And more than an accident."

"I suppose," said Derek contemptuously, "that it was this conversation
that you repeated to the Comte de la Roche."

Mirelle laughed.

"Am I a fool? Could the police do anything with a vague story like
that? See--I will give you a last chance. You shall give up this
Englishwoman. You shall return to me. And then, _chéri_, never, never
will I breathe--"

"Breathe what?"

She laughed softly. "You thought no one saw you--"

"What do you mean?"

"As I say, you thought no one saw you--but _I_ saw you, Dereek, _mon
ami_; _I saw you coming out of the compartment of Madame your wife just
before the train got into Lyons that night._ _And_ I know more than
that. I know that when you came out of her compartment she was dead."

He stared at her. Then, like a man in a dream he turned very slowly and
went out of the room, swaying slightly as he walked.




                             26. A Warning


"And so it is," said Poirot, "that we are the good friends and have no
secrets from each other."

Katherine turned her head to look at him. There was something in his
voice, some undercurrent of seriousness, which she had not heard before.

They were sitting in the gardens of Monte Carlo. Katherine had come
over with her friends, and they had run into Knighton and Poirot almost
immediately on arrival. Lady Tamplin had seized upon Knighton and had
overwhelmed him with reminiscences, most of which Katherine had a faint
suspicion were invented. They had moved away together, Lady Tamplin
with her hand on the young man's arm. Knighton had thrown a couple of
glances back over his shoulder, and Poirot's eyes twinkled a little as
he saw them.

"Of course we are friends," said Katherine.

"From the beginning we have been sympathetic to each other," mused
Poirot.

"When you told me that a 'Roman Policier' occurs in real life."

"And I was right, was I not?" he challenged her, with an emphatic
forefinger. "Here we are, plunged in the middle of one. That is natural
for me--it is my _métier_--but for you it is different. Yes," he added
in a reflective tone, "for you it is different."

She looked sharply at him. It was as though he were warning her,
pointing out to her some menace that she had not seen.

"Why do you say that I am in the middle of it? It is true that I
had that conversation with Mrs. Kettering just before she died, but
now--now all that is over. I am not connected with the case any more."

"Ah, Mademoiselle, Mademoiselle, can we ever say, 'I have finished with
this or that'?"

Katherine turned defiantly round to face him.

"What is it?" she asked. "You are trying to tell me something--to
convey it to me rather. But I am not clever at taking hints. I would
much rather that you said anything you have to say straight out."

Poirot looked at her sadly. "_Ah, mais c'est Anglais ça_," he murmured,
"everything in black and white, everything clear cut and well defined.
But life, it is not like that, Mademoiselle. There are the things that
are not yet, but which cast their shadow before."

He dabbed his brow with a very large silk pocket-handkerchief and
murmured:

"Ah, but it is that I become poetical. Let us, as you say, speak only
of facts. And, speaking of facts, tell me what you think of Major
Knighton."

"I like him very much indeed," said Katherine warmly; "he is quite
delightful."

Poirot sighed.

"What is the matter?" asked Katherine.

"You reply so heartily," said Poirot. "If you had said in an
indifferent voice, 'Oh, quite nice,' _eh bien_, do you know I should
have been better pleased."

Katherine did not answer. She felt slightly uncomfortable. Poirot went
on dreamily:

"And yet, who knows? With _les femmes_, they have so many ways of
concealing what they feel--and heartiness is perhaps as good a way as
any other."

He sighed.

"I don't see--" began Katherine.

He interrupted her.

"You do not see why I am being so impertinent, Mademoiselle? I am an
old man, and now and then--not very often--I come across some one whose
welfare is dear to me. We are friends, Mademoiselle. You have said so
yourself. And it is just this--I should like to see you happy."

Katherine stared very straight in front of her. She had a cretonne
sunshade with her, and with its point she traced little designs in the
gravel at her feet.

"I have asked you a question about Major Knighton, now I will ask you
another. Do you like Mr. Derek Kettering?"

"I hardly know him," said Katherine.

"That is not an answer, that."

"I think it is."

He looked at her, struck by something in her tone. Then he nodded his
head gravely and slowly.

"Perhaps you are right, Mademoiselle. See you, I who speak to you have
seen much of the world, and I know that there are two things which are
true. A good man may be ruined by his love for a bad woman--but the
other way holds good also. A bad man may equally be ruined by his love
for a good woman."

Katherine looked up sharply.

"When you say ruined--"

"I mean from his point of view. One must be wholehearted in crime as in
everything else."

"You are trying to warn me," said Katherine in a low voice. "Against
whom?"

"I cannot look into your heart, Mademoiselle; I do not think you would
let me if I could. I will just say this. There are men who have a
strange fascination for women."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine, with a smile.

"There are others--more dangerous than the Comte de la Roche. They
have qualities that appeal--recklessness, daring, audacity. You are
fascinated, Mademoiselle; I see that, but I think that it is no more
than that. I hope so. This man of whom I speak, the emotion he feels is
genuine enough, but all the same--"

"Yes?"

He got up and stood looking down at her. Then he spoke, in a low,
distinct voice:

"You could, perhaps, love a thief, Mademoiselle, _but not a murderer_."

He wheeled sharply away on that and left her sitting there.

He heard the little gasp she gave and paid no attention. He had
said what he meant to say. He left her there to digest that last
unmistakable phrase.

Derek Kettering, coming out of the Casino into the sunshine, saw her
sitting alone on the bench and joined her.

"I have been gambling," he said, with a light laugh, "gambling
unsuccessfully. I have lost everything--everything, that is, that I
have with me."

Katherine looked at him with a troubled face. She was aware at once
of something new in his manner, some hidden excitement that betrayed
itself in a hundred different infinitesimal signs.

"I should think you were always a gambler. The spirit of gambling
appeals to you."

"Every day and in every way a gambler? You are about right. Don't _you_
find something stimulating in it? To risk all on one throw--there is
nothing like it."

Calm and stolid as she believed herself to be, Katherine felt a faint
answering thrill.

"I want to talk to you," went on Derek, "and who knows when I may have
another opportunity? There is an idea going about that I murdered
my wife--no, please don't interrupt. It is absurd, of course." He
paused for a minute or two, then went on, speaking more deliberately.
"In dealing with the police and Local Authorities here I have had to
pretend to--well--a certain decency. I prefer not to pretend with you.
I meant to marry money. I was on the lookout for money when I first
met Ruth Van Aldin. She had the look of a slim Madonna about her,
and I--well--I made all sorts of good resolutions--and was bitterly
disillusioned. My wife was in love with another man when she married
me. She never cared for me in the least. Oh, I am not complaining; the
thing was a perfectly respectable bargain. She wanted Leconbury and I
wanted money. The trouble arose simply through Ruth's American blood.
Without caring a pin for me, she would have liked me to be continually
dancing attendance. Time and again she as good as told me that she had
bought me and that I belonged to her. The result was that I behaved
abominably to her. My father-in-law will tell you that, and he is
quite right. At the time of Ruth's death, I was faced with absolute
disaster." He laughed suddenly. "One _is_ faced with absolute disaster
when one is up against a man like Rufus Van Aldin."

"And then?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"And then," Derek shrugged his shoulders, "Ruth was murdered--very
providentially."

He laughed, and the sound of his laugh hurt Katherine. She winced.

"Yes," said Derek, "that wasn't in very good taste. But it is quite
true. Now I am going to tell you something more. From the very first
moment I saw you I knew you were the only woman in the world for me. I
was--afraid of you. I thought you might bring me bad luck."

"Bad luck?" said Katherine sharply.

He stared at her. "Why do you repeat it like that? What have you got in
your mind?"

"I was thinking of things that people have said to me."

Derek grinned suddenly. "They will say a lot to you about me, my dear,
and most of it will be true. Yes, and worse things too--things that I
shall never tell you. I have been a gambler always--and I have taken
some long odds. I shan't confess to you now or at any other time. The
past is done with. There is one thing I do wish you to believe. I swear
to you solemnly that I did not kill my wife."

He said the words earnestly enough, yet there was somehow a theatrical
touch about them. He met her troubled gaze and went on:

"I know. I lied the other day. It _was_ my wife's compartment I went
into."

"Ah," said Katherine.

"It's difficult to explain just why I went in, but I'll try. I did it
on an impulse. You see, I was more or less spying on my wife. I kept
out of sight on the train. Mirelle had told me that my wife was meeting
the Comte de la Roche in Paris. Well, as far as I had seen, that was
not so. I felt ashamed, and I thought suddenly that it would be a good
thing to have it out with her once and for all, so I pushed open the
door and went in."

He paused.

"Yes," said Katherine gently.

"Ruth was lying on the bunk asleep--her face was turned away from me--I
could see only the back of her head. I could have waked her up, of
course. But suddenly I felt a reaction. What, after all, was there to
say that we hadn't both of us said a hundred times before? She looked
so peaceful lying there. I left the compartment as quietly as I could."

"Why lie about it to the police?" asked Katherine.

"Because I'm not a complete fool. I've realized from the beginning
that, from the point of view of motive, I'm the ideal murderer. If I
once admitted that I had been in her compartment just before she was
murdered, I'd do for myself once and for all."

"I see."

Did she see? She could not have told herself. She was feeling the
magnetic attraction of Derek's personality, but there was something in
her that resisted, that held back....

"Katherine--"

"I--"

"You know that I care for you. Do--do you care for me?"

"I--I don't know."

Weakness there. Either she knew or she did not know. If--if only--

She cast a look round desperately as though seeking something that
would help her. A soft colour rose in her cheeks as a tall fair man
with a limp came hurrying along the path towards them--Major Knighton.

There was relief and an unexpected warmth in her voice as she greeted
him.

Derek stood up scowling, his face black as a thundercloud.

"Lady Tamplin having a flutter?" he said easily. "I must join her and
give her the benefit of my system."

He swung round on his heel and left them together. Katherine sat down
again. Her heart was beating rapidly and unevenly, but as she sat there
talking commonplaces to the quiet, rather shy man beside her, her
self-command came back.

Then she realized with a shock that Knighton also was laying bare his
heart, much as Derek had done, but in a very different manner.

He was shy and stammering. The words came haltingly with no eloquence
to back them.

"From the first moment I saw you--I--I ought not to have spoken so
soon--but Mr. Van Aldin may leave here any day, and I might not
have another chance. I know you can't care for me so soon--that is
impossible. I dare say it is presumption anyway on my part. I have
private means, but not very much--no, please don't answer now. I know
what your answer would be. But in case I went away suddenly I just
wanted you to know--that I care."

She was shaken--touched. His manner was so gentle and appealing.

"There's one thing more. I just wanted to say that if--if you are ever
in trouble, anything that I can do--"

He took her hand in his, held it tightly for a minute, then dropped it
and walked rapidly away towards the Casino without looking back.

Katherine sat perfectly still, looking after him. Derek
Kettering--Richard Knighton--two men so different--so very different.
There was something kind about Knighton, kind and trustworthy. As to
Derek--

Then suddenly Katherine had a very curious sensation. She felt that
she was no longer sitting alone on the seat in the Casino gardens, but
that some one was standing beside her, and that that some one was the
dead woman, Ruth Kettering. She had a further impression that Ruth
wanted--badly--to tell her something. The impression was so curious, so
vivid, that it could not be driven away. She felt absolutely certain
that the spirit of Ruth Kettering was trying to convey something of
vital importance to her. The impression faded. Katherine got up,
trembling a little. What was it that Ruth Kettering had wanted so badly
to say?




                      27. Interview with Mirelle


When Knighton left Katherine he went in search of Hercule Poirot, whom
he found in the Rooms, jauntily placing the minimum stake on the even
numbers. As Knighton joined him, the number thirty-three turned up, and
Poirot's stake was swept away.

"Bad luck!" said Knighton; "are you going to stake again?"

Poirot shook his head.

"Not at present."

"Do you feel the fascination of gambling?" asked Knighton curiously.

"Not at roulette."

Knighton shot a swift glance at him. His own face became troubled. He
spoke haltingly, with a touch of deference.

"I wonder, are you busy, M. Poirot? There is something I would like to
ask you about."

"I am at your disposal. Shall we go outside? It is pleasant in the
sunshine."

They strolled out together, and Knighton drew a deep breath.

"I love the Riviera," he said. "I came here first twelve years ago,
during the War, when I was sent to Lady Tamplin's Hospital. It was like
Paradise, coming from Flanders to this."

"It must have been," said Poirot.

"How long ago the War seems now!" mused Knighton.

They walked on in silence for some little way.

"You have something on your mind?" said Poirot.

Knighton looked at him in some surprise.

"You are quite right," he confessed. "I don't know how you knew it,
though."

"It showed itself only too plainly," said Poirot drily.

"I did not know that I was so transparent."

"It is my business to observe the physiognomy," the little man
explained, with dignity.

"I will tell you, M. Poirot. You have heard of this dancer
woman--Mirelle?"

"She who is the _chère amie_ of M. Derek Kettering?"

"Yes, that is the one; and, knowing this, you will understand that Mr.
Van Aldin is naturally prejudiced against her. She wrote to him, asking
for an interview. He told me to dictate a curt refusal, which of course
I did. This morning she came to the hotel and sent up her card, saying
that it was urgent and vital that she should see Mr. Van Aldin at once."

"You interest me," said Poirot.

"Mr. Van Aldin was furious. He told me what message to send down to
her. I ventured to disagree with him. It seemed to me both likely and
probable that this woman Mirelle might give us valuable information.
We know that she was on the Blue Train, and she may have seen or heard
something that it might be vital for us to know. Don't you agree with
me, M. Poirot?"

"I do," said Poirot drily. "M. Van Aldin, if I may say so, behaved
exceedingly foolishly."

"I am glad you take that view of the matter," said the secretary. "Now
I am going to tell you something, M. Poirot. So strongly did I feel the
unwisdom of Mr. Van Aldin's attitude that I went down privately and had
an interview with the lady."

"_Eh bien?_"

"The difficulty was that she insisted on seeing Mr. Van Aldin himself.
I softened his message as much as I possibly could. In fact--to be
candid--I gave it in a very different form. I said that Mr. Van Aldin
was too busy to see her at present, but that she might make any
communication she wished to me. That, however, she could not bring
herself to do, and she left without saying anything further. But I have
a strong impression, M. Poirot, that that woman knows something."

"This is serious," said Poirot quietly. "You know where she is staying?"

"Yes." Knighton mentioned the name of the hotel.

"Good," said Poirot; "we will go there immediately."

The secretary looked doubtful.

"And Mr. Van Aldin?" he queried doubtfully.

"M. Van Aldin is an obstinate man," said Poirot drily. "I do not argue
with obstinate men. I act in spite of them. We will go and see the lady
immediately. I will tell her that you are empowered by M. Van Aldin to
act for him, and you will guard yourself well from contradicting me."

Knighton still looked slightly doubtful, but Poirot took no notice of
his hesitation.

At the hotel, they were told that Mademoiselle was in, and Poirot sent
up both his and Knighton's cards, with "From Mr. Van Aldin" pencilled
upon them.

Word came down that Mademoiselle Mirelle would receive them.

When they were ushered into the dancer's apartments, Poirot immediately
took the lead.

"Mademoiselle," he murmured, bowing very low, "we are here on behalf of
M. Van Aldin."

"Ah! And why did he not come himself?"

"He is indisposed," said Poirot mendaciously; "the Riviera throat, it
has him in its grip, but me, I am empowered to act for him, as is Major
Knighton, his secretary. Unless, of course, Mademoiselle would prefer
to wait a fortnight or so."

If there was one thing of which Poirot was tolerably certain, it was
that to a temperament such as Mirelle's the mere word "wait" was
anathema.

"_Eh bien_, I will speak, Messieurs," she cried. "I have been patient.
I have held my hand. And for what? That I should be insulted! Yes,
insulted! Ah! Does he think to treat Mirelle like that? To throw her
off like an old glove. I tell you never has a man tired of me. Always
it is I who tire of them."

She paced up and down the room, her slender body trembling with rage. A
small table impeded her free passage and she flung it from her into a
corner, where it splintered against the wall.

"That is what I will do to him," she cried, "and that!"

Picking up a glass bowl filled with lilies she flung it into the grate,
where it smashed into a hundred pieces.

Knighton was looking at her with cold British disapproval. He felt
embarrassed and ill at ease. Poirot, on the other hand, with twinkling
eyes was thoroughly enjoying the scene.

"Ah, it is magnificent!" he cried. "It can be seen--Madame has a
temperament."

"I am an artist," said Mirelle; "every artist has a temperament. I told
Dereek to beware, and he would not listen." She whirled round on Poirot
suddenly. "It is true, is it not, that he wants to marry that English
miss?"

Poirot coughed.

"_On m'a dit_," he murmured, "that he adores her passionately."

Mirelle came towards them.

"He murdered his wife," she screamed. "There--now you have it! He told
me beforehand that he meant to do it. He had got to an _impasse_--zut!
he took the easiest way out."

"You say that M. Kettering murdered his wife."

"Yes, yes, yes. Have I not told you so?"

"The police," murmured Poirot, "will need proof of that--er--statement."

"I tell you I saw him come out of her compartment that night on the
train."

"When?" asked Poirot sharply.

"Just before the train reached Lyons."

"You will swear to that, Mademoiselle?"

It was a different Poirot who spoke now, sharp and decisive.

"Yes."

There was a moment's silence. Mirelle was panting, and her eyes, half
defiant, half frightened, went from the face of one man to the other.

"This is a serious matter, Mademoiselle," said the detective. "You
realize how serious?"

"Certainly I do."

"That is well," said Poirot. "Then you understand, Mademoiselle, that
no time must be lost. You will, perhaps, accompany us immediately to
the office of the Examining Magistrate."

Mirelle was taken aback. She hesitated, but, as Poirot had foreseen,
she had no loophole for escape.

"Very well," she muttered. "I will fetch a coat."

Left alone together, Poirot and Knighton exchanged glances.

"It is necessary to act while--how do you say it?--the iron is hot,"
murmured Poirot. "She is temperamental; in an hour's time, maybe, she
will repent, and she will wish to draw back. We must prevent that at
all costs."

Mirelle reappeared, wrapped in a sand-coloured velvet wrap trimmed with
leopard skin. She looked not altogether unlike a leopardess, tawny and
dangerous. Her eyes still flashed with anger and determination.

They found M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate together. A few
brief introductory words from Poirot, and Mademoiselle Mirelle was
courteously entreated to tell her tale. This she did in much the same
words as she had done to Knighton and Poirot, though with far more
soberness of manner.

"This is an extraordinary story, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège slowly.
He leant back in his chair, adjusted his pince-nez, and looked keenly
and searchingly at the dancer through them.

"You wish us to believe M. Kettering actually boasted of the crime to
you beforehand?"

"Yes, yes. She was too healthy, he said. If she were to die it must be
an accident--he would arrange it all."

"You are aware, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège sternly, "that you are
making yourself out to be an accessory before the fact?"

"Me? But not the least in the world, Monsieur. Not for a moment did I
take that statement seriously. Ah no, indeed! I know men, Monsieur;
they say many wild things. It would be an odd state of affairs if one
were to take all they said _au pied de la lettre_."

The Examining Magistrate raised his eyebrows.

"We are to take it, then, that you regarded M. Kettering's threats as
mere idle words? May I ask, Mademoiselle, what made you throw up your
engagements in London and come out to the Riviera?"

Mirelle looked at him with melting black eyes.

"I wished to be with the man I loved," she said simply. "Was it so
unnatural?"

Poirot interpolated a question gently.

"Was it, then, at M. Kettering's wish that you accompanied him to Nice?"

Mirelle seemed to find a little difficulty in answering this. She
hesitated perceptibly before she spoke. When she did, it was with a
haughty indifference of manner.

"In such matters I please myself, Monsieur," she said.

That the answer was not an answer at all was noted by all three men.
They said nothing.

"When were you first convinced that M. Kettering had murdered his wife?"

"As I tell you, Monsieur, I saw M. Kettering come out of his wife's
compartment just before the train drew into Lyons. There was a look on
his face--ah! at the moment I could not understand it--a look haunted
and terrible. I shall never forget it."

Her voice rose shrilly, and she flung out her arms in an extravagant
gesture.

"Quite so," said M. Carrège.

"Afterwards, when I found that Madame Kettering was dead when the train
left Lyons, then--then I knew!"

"And still--you did not go to the police, Mademoiselle," said the
Commissary mildly.

Mirelle glanced at him superbly; she was clearly enjoying herself in
the rôle she was playing.

"Shall I betray my lover?" she asked. "Ah no; do not ask a woman to do
that."

"Yet now--" hinted M. Caux.

"Now it is different. He has betrayed me! Shall I suffer that in
silence...?"

The Examining Magistrate checked her.

"Quite so, quite so," he murmured soothingly. "And now, Mademoiselle,
perhaps you will read over the statement of what you have told us, see
that it is correct, and sign it."

Mirelle wasted no time on the document.

"Yes, yes," she said, "it is correct." She rose to her feet. "You
require me no longer, Messieurs?"

"At present, no, Mademoiselle."

"And Dereek will be arrested?"

"At once, Mademoiselle."

Mirelle laughed cruelly and drew her fur draperies closer about her.

"He should have thought of this before he insulted me," she cried.

"There is one little matter"--Poirot coughed apologetically--"just a
matter of detail."

"Yes?"

"What makes you think Madame Kettering was dead when the train left
Lyons?"

Mirelle stared.

"But she _was_ dead."

"Was she?"

"Yes, of course. I--"

She came to an abrupt stop. Poirot was regarding her intently, and he
saw the wary look that came into her eyes.

"I have been told so. Everybody says so."

"Oh," said Poirot, "I was not aware that the fact had been mentioned
outside the Examining Magistrate's office."

Mirelle appeared somewhat discomposed.

"One hears those things," she said vaguely; "they get about. Somebody
told me. I can't remember who it was."

She moved to the door. M. Caux sprang forward to open it for her, and
as he did so, Poirot's voice rose gently once more.

"And the jewels? Pardon, Mademoiselle. Can you tell me anything about
those?"

"The jewels? What jewels?"

"The rubies of Catherine the Great. Since you hear so much, you must
have heard of them."

"I know nothing about any jewels," said Mirelle sharply.

She went out, closing the door behind her. M. Caux came back to his
chair; the Examining Magistrate sighed.

"What a fury!" he said, "but _diablement chic_, I wonder if she is
telling the truth? I think so."

"There is _some_ truth in her story, certainly," said Poirot. "We have
confirmation of it from Miss Grey. She was looking down the corridor a
short time before the train reached Lyons and she saw M. Kettering go
into his wife's compartment."

"The case against him seems quite clear," said the Commissary, sighing;
"it is a thousand pities," he murmured.

"How do you mean?" asked Poirot.

"It has been the ambition of my life to lay the Comte de la Roche
by the heels. This time, _ma foi_, I thought we had got him. This
other--it is not nearly so satisfactory."

M. Carrège rubbed his nose.

"If anything goes wrong," he observed cautiously, "it will be most
awkward. M. Kettering is of the aristocracy. It will get into the
newspapers. If we have made a mistake--" He shrugged his shoulders
forebodingly.

"The jewels now," said the Commissary, "what do you think he has done
with them?"

"He took them for a plant, of course," said M. Carrège; "they must have
been a great inconvenience to him and very awkward to dispose of."

Poirot smiled.

"I have an idea of my own about the jewels. Tell me, Messieurs, what do
you know of a man called the Marquis?"

The Commissary leant forward excitedly.

"The Marquis," he said, "the Marquis? Do you think he is mixed up in
this affair, M. Poirot?"

"I ask you what you know of him."

The Commissary made an expressive grimace.

"Not as much as we should like to," he observed ruefully. "He works
behind the scenes, you understand. He has underlings who do his dirty
work for him. But he is some one high up. That we are sure of. He does
not come from the criminal classes."

"A Frenchman?"

"Y--es. At least we believe so. But we are not sure. He has worked in
France, in England, in America. There was a series of robberies in
Switzerland last autumn which were laid at his door. By all accounts
he is a _grand seigneur_, speaking French and English with equal
perfection and his origin is a mystery."

Poirot nodded and rose to take his departure.

"Can you tell us nothing more, M. Poirot," urged the Commissary.

"At present, no," said Poirot, "but I may have news awaiting me at my
hotel."

M. Carrège looked uncomfortable. "If the Marquis is concerned in
this--" he began, and then stopped.

"It upsets our ideas," complained M. Caux.

"It does not upset mine," said Poirot. "On the contrary, I think it
agrees with them very well. Au revoir, Messieurs; if news of any
importance comes to me I will communicate it to you immediately."

He walked back to his hotel with a grave face. In his absence a
telegram had come to him. Taking a paper-cutter from his pocket, he
slit it open. It was a long telegram, and he read it over twice before
slowly putting it in his pocket. Upstairs, George was awaiting his
master.

"I am fatigued, Georges, much fatigued. Will you order for me a small
pot of chocolate?"

The chocolate was duly ordered and brought, and George set it at the
little table at his master's elbow. As he was preparing to retire,
Poirot spoke:

"I believe, Georges, that you have a good knowledge of the English
aristocracy?" murmured Poirot.

George smiled apologetically.

"I think that I might say that I have, sir," he replied.

"I suppose that it is your opinion, Georges, that criminals are
invariably drawn from the lower orders."

"Not always, sir. There was great trouble with one of the Duke of
Devize's younger sons. He left Eton under a cloud, and after that he
caused great anxiety on several occasions. The police would not accept
the view that it was kleptomania. A very clever young gentleman, sir,
but vicious through and through, if you take my meaning. His Grace
shipped him to Australia, and I hear he was convicted out there under
another name. Very odd, sir, but there it is. The young gentleman, I
need hardly say, was not in want financially."

Poirot nodded his head slowly.

"Love of excitement," he murmured, "and a little kink in the brain
somewhere. I wonder now--"

He drew out the telegram from his pocket and read it again.

"Then there was Lady Mary Fox's daughter," continued the valet in a
mood of reminiscence. "Swindled tradespeople something shocking, she
did. Very worrying to the best families, if I may say so, and there are
many other queer cases I could mention."

"You have a wide experience, Georges," murmured Poirot. "I often
wonder having lived so exclusively with titled families that you
demean yourself by coming as a valet to me. I put it down to love of
excitement on your part."

"Not exactly, sir," said George. "I happened to see in _Society
Snippets_ that you had been received at Buckingham Palace. That was
just when I was looking for a new situation. His Majesty, so it said,
had been most gracious and friendly and thought very highly of your
abilities."

"Ah," said Poirot, "one always likes to know the reason for things."

He remained in thought for a few moments and then said:

"You rang up Mademoiselle Papopolous?"

"Yes, sir; she and her father will be pleased to dine with you
to-night."

"Ah," said Poirot thoughtfully. He drank off his chocolate, set the
cup and saucer neatly in the middle of the tray, and spoke gently, more
to himself than to the valet.

"The squirrel, my good Georges, collects nuts. He stores them up in
the autumn so that they may be of advantage to him later. To make a
success of humanity, Georges, we must profit by the lessons of those
below us in the animal kingdom. I have always done so. I have been the
cat, watching at the mouse hole. I have been the good dog following up
the scent, and not taking my nose from the trail. And also, my good
Georges, I have been the squirrel. I have stored away the little fact
here, the little fact there. I go now to my store and I take out one
particular nut, a nut that I stored away--let me see, seventeen years
ago. You follow me, Georges?"

"I should hardly have thought, sir," said George, "that nuts would have
kept so long as that, though I know one can do wonders with preserving
bottles."

Poirot looked at him and smiled.




                     28. Poirot Plays the Squirrel


Poirot started to keep his dinner appointment with a margin of
three-quarters of an hour to spare. He had an object in this. The car
took him, not straight to Monte Carlo, but to Lady Tamplin's house at
Cap Martin, where he asked for Miss Grey. The ladies were dressing and
Poirot was shown into a small salon to wait, and here, after a lapse of
three or four minutes, Lenox Tamplin came to him.

"Katherine is not quite ready yet," she said. "Can I give her a
message, or would you rather wait until she comes down?"

Poirot looked at her thoughtfully. He was a minute or two in replying,
as though something of great weight hung upon his decision. Apparently
the answer to such a simple question mattered.

"No," he said at last, "no, I do not think it is necessary that I
should wait to see Mademoiselle Katherine. I think, perhaps, that it is
better that I should not. These things are sometimes difficult."

Lenox waited politely, her eyebrows slightly raised.

"I have a piece of news," continued Poirot. "You will, perhaps, tell
your friend. M. Kettering was arrested to-night for the murder of his
wife."

"You want me to tell Katherine that?" asked Lenox. She breathed rather
hard, as though she had been running; her face, Poirot thought, looked
white and strained--rather noticeably so.

"If you please, Mademoiselle."

"Why?" said Lenox. "Do you think Katherine will be upset? Do you think
she cares?"

"I don't know, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "See, I admit it frankly.
As a rule I know everything, but in this case, I--well, I do not. You,
perhaps, know better than I do."

"Yes," said Lenox, "I know--but I am not going to tell you all the
same."

She paused for a minute or two, her dark brows drawn together in a
frown.

"You believe he did it?" she said abruptly.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"The police say so."

"Ah," said Lenox, "hedging, are you? So there is something to hedge
about."

Again she was silent, frowning. Poirot said gently:

"You have known Derek Kettering a long time, have you not?"

"Off and on ever since I was a kid," said Lenox gruffly.

Poirot nodded his head several times without speaking.

With one of her brusque movements Lenox drew forward a chair and sat
down on it, her elbows on the table and her face supported by her
hands. Sitting thus, she looked directly across the table at Poirot.

"What have they got to go on?" she demanded. "Motive, I suppose.
Probably came into money at her death."

"He came into two million."

"And if she had not died he would have been ruined?"

"Yes."

"But there must have been more than that," persisted Lenox. "He
travelled by the same train, I know, but--that would not be enough to
go on by itself."

"A cigarette case with the letter 'K' on it which did not belong to
Mrs. Kettering was found in her carriage, and he was seen by two people
entering and leaving the compartment just before the train got into
Lyons."

"What two people?"

"Your friend Miss Grey was one of them. The other was Mademoiselle
Mirelle, the dancer."

"And he, Derek, what has he got to say about it?" demanded Lenox
sharply.

"He denies having entered his wife's compartment at all," said Poirot.

"Fool!" said Lenox crisply, frowning. "Just before Lyons, you say? Does
nobody know when--when she died?"

"The doctors' evidence necessarily cannot be very definite," said
Poirot; "they are inclined to think that death was unlikely to have
occurred after leaving Lyons. And we know this much, that a few moments
after leaving Lyons Mrs. Kettering was dead."

"How do you know that?"

Poirot was smiling rather oddly to himself.

"Some one else went into her compartment and found her dead."

"And they did not rouse the train?"

"No."

"Why was that?"

"Doubtless they had their reasons."

Lenox looked at him sharply.

"Do you know the reason?"

"I think so--yes."

Lenox sat still turning things over in her mind. Poirot watched her in
silence. At last she looked up. A soft colour had come into her cheeks
and her eyes were shining.

"You think some one on the train must have killed her, but that need
not be so at all. What is to stop any one swinging themselves on to
the train when it stopped at Lyons? They could go straight to her
compartment, strangle her, and take the rubies and drop off the train
again without any one being the wiser. She may have been actually
killed while the train was in Lyons station. Then she would have been
alive when Derek went in, and dead when the other person found her."

Poirot leant back in his chair. He drew a deep breath. He looked across
at the girl and nodded his head three times, then he heaved a sigh.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "what you have said there is very just--very
true. I was struggling in darkness, and you have shown me a light.
There was a point that puzzled me and you have made it plain."

He got up.

"And Derek?" said Lenox.

"Who knows?" said Poirot, with a shrug of his shoulders. "But I will
tell you this, Mademoiselle. I am not satisfied; no, I, Hercule Poirot,
am not yet satisfied. It may be that this very night I shall learn
something more. At least, I go to try."

"You are meeting some one?"

"Yes."

"Some one who knows something?"

"Some one who might know something. In these matters one must leave no
stone unturned. Au revoir, Mademoiselle."

Lenox accompanied him to the door.

"Have I--helped?" she asked.

Poirot's face softened as he looked up at her standing on the doorstep
above him.

"Yes, Mademoiselle, you have helped. If things are very dark, always
remember that."

When the car had driven off he relapsed into a frowning absorption, but
in his eyes was that faint green light which was always the precursor
of the triumph to be.

He was a few minutes late at the rendezvous, and found that M.
Papopolous and his daughter had arrived before him. His apologies were
abject, and he outdid himself in politeness and small attentions.
The Greek was looking particularly benign and noble this evening, a
sorrowful patriarch of blameless life. Zia was looking handsome and
good humoured. The dinner was a pleasant one. Poirot was his best and
most sparkling self. He told anecdotes, he made jokes, he paid graceful
compliments to Zia Papopolous, and he told many interesting incidents
of his career. The menu was a carefully selected one, and the wine was
excellent.

At the close of dinner M. Papopolous inquired politely:

"And the tip I gave you? You have had your little flutter on the horse?"

"I am in communication with--er--my bookmaker," replied Poirot.

The eyes of the two men met.

"A well-known horse, eh?"

"No," said Poirot; "it is what our friends, the English, call a dark
horse."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous thoughtfully.

"Now we must step across to the Casino and have our little flutter at
the roulette table," cried Poirot gaily.

At the Casino the party separated, Poirot devoting himself solely to
Zia, whilst Papopolous himself drifted away.

Poirot was not fortunate, but Zia had a run of good luck, and had soon
won a few thousand francs.

"It would be as well," she observed drily to Poirot, "if I stopped now."

Poirot's eyes twinkled.

"Superb!" he exclaimed. "You are the daughter of your father,
Mademoiselle Zia. To know when to stop. Ah! that is the art."

He looked round the rooms.

"I cannot see your father anywhere about," he remarked carelessly. "I
will fetch your cloak for you, Mademoiselle, and we will go out in the
gardens."

He did not, however, go straight to the cloak-room. His sharp eyes had
seen but a little while before the departure of M. Papopolous. He was
anxious to know what had become of the wily Greek. He ran him to earth
unexpectedly in the big entrance hall. He was standing by one of the
pillars, talking to a lady who had just arrived. The lady was Mirelle.

Poirot sidled unostentatiously round the room. He arrived at the other
side of the pillar, and unnoticed by the two who were talking together
in an animated fashion--or rather, that is to say, the dancer was
talking, Papopolous contributing an occasional monosyllable and a good
many expressive gestures.

"I tell you I must have time," the dancer was saying. "If you give me
time I will get the money."

"To wait"--the Greek shrugged his shoulders--"it is awkward."

"Only a very little while," pleaded the other. "Ah! but you must! A
week--ten days--that is all I ask. You can be sure of your affair. The
money will be forthcoming."

Papopolous shifted a little and looked round him uneasily--to find
Poirot almost at his elbow with a beaming innocent face.

"_Ah! vous voilà_, M. Papopolous. I have been looking for you. It
is permitted that I take Mademoiselle Zia for a little turn in the
gardens? Good evening, Mademoiselle." He bowed very low to Mirelle. "A
thousand pardons that I did not see you immediately."

The dancer accepted his greetings rather impatiently. She was clearly
annoyed at the interruption of her _tête-à-tête_. Poirot was quick
to take the hint. Papopolous had already murmured: "Certainly--but
certainly," and Poirot withdrew forthwith.

He fetched Zia's cloak, and together they strolled out into the gardens.

"This is where the suicides take place," said Zia.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "So it is said. Men are foolish, are
they not, Mademoiselle? To eat, to drink, to breathe the good air,
it is a very pleasant thing, Mademoiselle. One is foolish to leave
all that simply because one has no money--or because the heart aches.
_L'amour_, it causes many fatalities, does it not?"

Zia laughed.

"You should not laugh at love, Mademoiselle," said Poirot, shaking an
energetic forefinger at her. "You who are young and beautiful."

"Hardly that," said Zia; "you forget that I am thirty-three, M. Poirot.
I am frank with you, because it is no good being otherwise. As you told
my father, it is exactly seventeen years since you aided us in Paris
that time."

"When I look at you, it seems much less," said Poirot gallantly. "You
were then very much as you are now, Mademoiselle, a little thinner,
a little paler, a little more serious. Sixteen years old and fresh
from your pension. Not quite the _petite pensionnaire_, not quite a
woman. You were very delicious, very charming, Mademoiselle Zia; others
thought so too, without doubt."

"At sixteen," said Zia, "one is simple and a little fool."

"That may be," said Poirot, "yes, that well may be. At sixteen one is
credulous, is one not? One believes what one is told."

If he saw the quick sideways glance that the girl shot at him, he
pretended not to have done so. He continued dreamily: "It was a
curious affair that, altogether. Your father, Mademoiselle, has never
understood the true inwardness of it."

"No?"

"When he asked me for details, for explanations, I said to him thus:
'Without scandal, I have got back for you that which was lost. You must
ask no questions.' Do you know, Mademoiselle, why I said these things?"

"I have no idea," said the girl coldly.

"It was because I had a soft spot in my heart for a little
pensionnaire, so pale, so thin, so serious."

"I don't understand what you are talking about," cried Zia angrily.

"Do you not, Mademoiselle? Have you forgotten Antonio Pirezzio?"

He heard the quick intake of her breath--almost a gasp.

"He came to work as an assistant in the shop, but not thus could he
have got hold of what he wanted. An assistant can lift his eyes to
his master's daughter, can he not? If he is young and handsome with
a glib tongue. And since they cannot make love all the time, they
must occasionally talk of things that interest them both--such as
that very interesting thing which was temporarily in M. Papopolous'
possession. And since, as you say, Mademoiselle, the young are foolish
and credulous, it was easy to believe him and to give him a sight of
that particular thing, to show him where it was kept. And afterwards
when it is gone--when the unbelievable catastrophe has happened. Alas!
the poor little pensionnaire. What a terrible position she is in. She
is frightened, the poor little one. To speak or not to speak? And
then there comes along that excellent fellow, Hercule Poirot. Almost
a miracle it must have been, the way things arranged themselves. The
priceless heirlooms are restored and there are no awkward questions."

Zia turned on him fiercely.

"You have known all the time? Who told you? Was it--was it Antonio?"

Poirot shook his head.

"No one told me," he said quietly. "I guessed. It was a good guess, was
it not, Mademoiselle? You see, unless you are good at guessing, it is
not much use being a detective."

The girl walked along beside him for some minutes in silence. Then she
said in a hard voice:

"Well, what are you going to do about it, are you going to tell my
father?"

"No," said Poirot sharply. "Certainly not."

She looked at him curiously.

"You want something from me?"

"I want your help, Mademoiselle."

"What makes you think that I can help you?"

"I do not think so. I only hope so."

"And if I do not help you, then--you will tell my father?"

"But no, but no! Debarrass yourself of that idea, Mademoiselle. I
am not a blackmailer. I do not hold your secret over your head and
threaten you with it."

"If I refuse to help you--" began the girl slowly.

"Then you refuse, and that is that."

"Then why--" she stopped.

"Listen, and I will tell you why. Women, Mademoiselle, are generous. If
they can render a service to one who has rendered a service to them,
they will do it. I was generous once to you, Mademoiselle. When I might
have spoken, I held my tongue."

There was another silence; then the girl said, "My father gave you a
hint the other day."

"It was very kind of him."

"I do not think," said Zia slowly, "that there is anything that I can
add to that."

If Poirot was disappointed he did not show it. Not a muscle of his face
changed.

"_Eh bien!_" he said cheerfully, "then we must talk of other things."

And he proceeded to chat gaily. The girl was _distraite_, however, and
her answers were mechanical and not always to the point. It was when
they were approaching the Casino once more that she seemed to come to a
decision.

"M. Poirot?"

"Yes, Mademoiselle?"

"I--I should like to help you if I could."

"You are very amiable, Mademoiselle--very amiable."

Again there was a pause. Poirot did not press her. He was quite content
to wait and let her take her own time.

"Ah bah," said Zia, "after all, why should I not tell you? My father is
cautious--always cautious in everything he says. But I know that with
you it is not necessary. You have told us it is only the murderer you
seek, and that you are not concerned over the jewels. I believe you.
You were quite right when you guessed that we were in Nice because
of the rubies. They have been handed over here according to plan. My
father has them now. He gave you a hint the other day as to who our
mysterious client was."

"The Marquis?" murmured Poirot softly.

"Yes, the Marquis."

"Have you ever seen the Marquis, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"Once," said the girl. "But not very well," she added. "It was through
a keyhole."

"That always presents difficulties," said Poirot sympathetically, "but
all the same you saw him. You would know him again?"

Zia shook her head.

"He wore a mask," she explained.

"Young or old?"

"He had white hair. It may have been a wig, it may not. It fitted very
well. But I do not think he was old. His walk was young, and so was his
voice."

"His voice?" said Poirot thoughtfully. "Ah, his voice! Would you know
it again, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"I might," said the girl.

"You were interested in him, eh? It was that that took you to the
keyhole."

Zia nodded.

"Yes, yes. I was curious. One had heard so much--he is not the ordinary
thief--he is more like a figure of history or romance."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "yes; perhaps so."

"But it is not this that I meant to tell you," said Zia. "It was just
one other little fact that I thought might be--well--useful to you."

"Yes?" said Poirot encouragingly.

"The rubies, as I say, were handed over to my father here at Nice. I
did not see the person who handed them over, but--"

"Yes?"

"I know one thing. _It was a woman._"




                        29. A Letter From Home


    "_Dear Katherine--Living among grand friends as you are doing now,
    I don't suppose you will care to hear any of our news; but as I
    always thought you were a sensible girl, perhaps you are a trifle
    less swollen-headed than I suppose. Everything goes on much the
    same here. There was great trouble about the new curate, who is
    scandalously high. In my view, he is neither more nor less than a
    Roman. Everybody has spoken to the Vicar about it, but you know
    what the Vicar is--all Christian charity and no proper spirit. I
    have had a lot of trouble with maids lately. That girl Annie was
    no good--skirts up to her knees and wouldn't wear sensible woollen
    stockings. Not one of them can bear being spoken to. I have had a
    lot of pain with my rheumatism one way and another, and Dr. Harris
    persuaded me to go and see a London specialist--a waste of three
    guineas and a railway fare, as I told him; but by waiting until
    Wednesday I managed to get a cheap return. The London doctor pulled
    a long face and talked all round about and never straight out,
    until I said to him, 'I'm a plain woman, Doctor, and I like things
    to be plainly stated. Is it cancer, or is it not?' And then, of
    course, he had to say it was. They say a year with care, and not
    too much pain, though I am sure I can bear pain as well as any
    other Christian woman. Life seems rather lonely at times, with most
    of my friends dead or gone before. I wish you were in St. Mary
    Mead, my dear, and that is a fact. If you hadn't come into this
    money and gone off into grand society, I would have offered you
    double the salary poor Jane gave you to come and look after me;
    but there--there's no good wanting what we can't get. However, if
    things should go ill with you--and that is always possible. I have
    heard no end of tales of bogus noblemen marrying girls and getting
    hold of their money and then leaving them at the church door. I
    dare say you are too sensible for anything of the kind to happen to
    you, but one never knows; and never having had much attention of
    any kind it might easily go to your head now. So just in case, my
    dear, remember there is always a home for you here; and though a
    plain-spoken woman I am a warm-hearted one too.--Your affectionate
    old friend,_

                                                       "_Amelia Viner._

    "_P.S.--I saw a mention of you in the paper with your cousin,
    Viscountess Tamplin, and I cut it out and put it with my cuttings.
    I prayed for you on Sunday that you might be kept from pride and
    vainglory._"

Katherine read this characteristic epistle through twice, then she laid
it down and stared out of her bedroom window across the blue waters
of the Mediterranean. She felt a curious lump in her throat. A sudden
wave of longing for St. Mary Mead swept over her. So full of familiar,
everyday, stupid little things--and yet--home. She felt very inclined
to lay her head down on her arms and indulge in a real good cry.

Lenox, coming in at the moment, saved her.

"Hello, Katherine," said Lenox. "I say--what is the matter?"

"Nothing," said Katherine, grabbing up Miss Viner's letter and
thrusting it into her handbag.

"You looked rather queer," said Lenox. "I say--I hope you don't mind--I
rang up your detective friend, M. Poirot, and asked him to lunch with
us in Nice. I said you wanted to see him, as I thought he might not
come for me."

"Did you want to see him then?" asked Katherine.

"Yes," said Lenox. "I have rather lost my heart to him. I never met a
man before whose eyes were really green like a cat's."

"All right," said Katherine. She spoke listlessly. The last few days
had been trying. Derek Kettering's arrest had been the topic of the
hour, and the Blue Train Mystery had been thrashed out from every
conceivable standpoint.

"I have ordered the car," said Lenox, "and I have told Mother some lie
or other--unfortunately I can't remember exactly what; but it won't
matter, as she never remembers. If she knew where we were going, she
would want to come too, to pump M. Poirot."

The two girls arrived at the Negresco to find Poirot waiting.

He was full of Gallic politeness, and showered so many compliments upon
the two girls that they were soon helpless with laughter; yet for all
that the meal was not a gay one. Katherine was dreamy and distracted,
and Lenox made bursts of conversation, interspersed by silences. As
they were sitting on the terrace sipping their coffee she suddenly
attacked Poirot bluntly.

"How are things going? You know what I mean?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "They take their course," he said.

"And you are just letting them take their course?"

He looked at Lenox a little sadly.

"You are young, Mademoiselle, but there are three things that cannot be
hurried--_le bon Dieu_, Nature, and old people."

"Nonsense!" said Lenox. "You are not old."

"Ah, it is pretty what you say there."

"Here is Major Knighton," said Lenox.

Katherine looked round quickly and then turned back again.

"He is with Mr. Van Aldin," continued Lenox. "There is something I want
to ask Major Knighton about. I won't be a minute."

Left alone together, Poirot bent forward and murmured to Katherine:

"You are _distraite_, Mademoiselle; your thoughts, they are far away,
are they not?"

"Just as far as England, no farther."

Guided by a sudden impulse, she took the letter she had received that
morning and handed it across to him to read.

"That is the first word that has come to me from my old life; somehow
or other--it hurts."

He read it through and then handed it back to her. "So you are going
back to St. Mary Mead?" he said slowly.

"No, I am not," said Katherine; "why should I?"

"Ah," said Poirot, "it is my mistake. You will excuse me one little
minute."

He strolled across to where Lenox Tamplin was talking to Van Aldin and
Knighton. The American looked old and haggard. He greeted Poirot with a
curt nod but without any other sign of animation.

As he turned to reply to some observation made by Lenox, Poirot drew
Knighton aside.

"M. Van Aldin looks ill," he said.

"Do you wonder?" asked Knighton. "The scandal of Derek Kettering's
arrest has about put the lid on things, as far as he is concerned. He
is even regretting that he asked you to find out the truth."

"He should go back to England," said Poirot.

"We are going the day after to-morrow."

"That is good news," said Poirot.

He hesitated, and looked across the terrace to where Katherine was
sitting.

"I wish," he murmured, "that you could tell Miss Grey that."

"Tell her what?"

"That you--I mean that M. Van Aldin is returning to England."

Knighton looked a little puzzled, but he readily crossed the terrace
and joined Katherine.

Poirot saw him go with a satisfied nod of the head, and then joined
Lenox and the American. After a minute or two they joined the others.
Conversation was general for a few minutes, then the millionaire and
his secretary departed. Poirot also prepared to take his departure.

"A thousand thanks for your hospitality, Mesdemoiselles," he cried;
"it has been a most charming luncheon. _Ma foi_, I needed it!" He
swelled out his chest and thumped it. "I am now a lion--a giant. Ah,
Mademoiselle Katherine, you have not seen me as I can be. You have
seen the gentle, the calm Hercule Poirot; but there is another Hercule
Poirot. I go now to bully, to threaten, to strike terror into the
hearts of those who listen to me."

He looked at them in a self-satisfied way, and they both appeared to be
duly impressed, though Lenox was biting her under lip, and the corners
of Katherine's mouth had a suspicious twitch.

"And I shall do it," he said gravely. "Oh yes, I shall succeed."

He had gone but a few steps when Katherine's voice made him turn.

"M. Poirot, I--I want to tell you. I think you were right in what you
said. I am going back to England almost immediately."

Poirot stared at her very hard, and under the directness of his
scrutiny she blushed.

"I see," he said gravely.

"I don't believe you do," said Katherine.

"I know more than you think, Mademoiselle," he said quietly.

He left her, with an odd little smile upon his lips. Entering a waiting
car, he drove to Antibes.

Hippolyte, the Comte de la Roche's wooden-faced man-servant, was busy
at the Villa Marina polishing his master's beautiful cut table glass.
The Comte de la Roche himself had gone to Monte Carlo for the day.
Chancing to look out of the window, Hippolyte espied a visitor walking
briskly up to the hall door, a visitor of so uncommon a type that
Hippolyte, experienced as he was, had some difficulty in placing him.
Calling to his wife, Marie, who was busy in the kitchen, he drew her
attention to what he called _ce type là_.

"It is not the police again?" said Marie anxiously.

"Look for yourself," said Hippolyte.

Marie looked.

"Certainly not the police," she declared. "I am glad."

"They have not really worried us much," said Hippolyte. "In fact, but
for Monsieur le Comte's warning, I should never have guessed that
stranger at the wine-shop to be what he was."

The hall bell pealed and Hippolyte, in a grave and decorous manner,
went to open the door.

"M. le Comte, I regret to say, is not at home."

The little man with the large moustaches beamed placidly.

"I know that," he replied. "You are Hippolyte Flavelle, are you not?"

"Yes, Monsieur, that is my name."

"And you have a wife, Marie Flavelle?"

"Yes, Monsieur, but--"

"I desire to see you both," said the stranger, and he stepped nimbly
past Hippolyte into the hall.

"Your wife is doubtless in the kitchen," he said. "I will go there."

Before Hippolyte could recover his breath, the other had selected the
right door at the back of the hall and passed along the passage and
into the kitchen, where Marie paused open-mouthed to stare at him.

"_Voilà_," said the stranger, and sank into a wooden arm-chair; "I am
Hercule Poirot."

"Yes, Monsieur?"

"You do not know the name?"

"I have never heard it," said Hippolyte.

"Permit me to say that you have been badly educated. It is the name of
one of the great ones of this world."

He sighed and folded his hands across his chest.

Hippolyte and Marie were staring at him uneasily. They were at a loss
what to make of this unexpected and extremely strange visitor.

"Monsieur desires--" murmured Hippolyte mechanically.

"I desire to know why you have lied to the police."

"Monsieur!" cried Hippolyte; "I--lied to the police? Never have I done
such a thing."

M. Poirot shook his head.

"You are wrong," he said; "you have done it on several occasions. Let
me see." He took a small notebook from his pocket and consulted it.
"Ah, yes; on seven occasions at least. I will recite them to you."

In a gentle unemotional voice he proceeded to outline the seven
occasions.

Hippolyte was taken aback.

"But it is not of these past lapses that I wish to speak," continued
Poirot, "only, my dear friend, do not get into the habit of thinking
yourself too clever. I come now to the particular lie in which I am
concerned--your statement that the Comte de la Roche arrived at this
villa on the morning of 14th January."

"But that was no lie, Monsieur; that was the truth. Monsieur le Comte
arrived here on the morning of Tuesday, the 14th. That is so, Marie, is
it not?"

Marie assented eagerly.

"Ah, yes, that is quite right. I remember it perfectly."

"Ah," said Poirot, "and what did you give your good master for
_déjeuner_ that day?"

"I--" Marie paused, trying to collect herself.

"Odd," said Poirot, "how one remembers some things--and forgets others."

He leant forward and struck the table a blow with his fist; his eyes
flashed with anger.

"Yes, yes, it is as I say. You tell your lies and you think nobody
knows. But there are two people who know. Yes--two people. One is _le
bon Dieu_--"

He raised a hand to heaven, and then settling himself back in his chair
and shutting his eyelids, he murmured comfortably:

"And the other is Hercule Poirot."

"I assure you, Monsieur, you are completely mistaken. Monsieur le Comte
left Paris on Monday night--"

"True," said Poirot--"by the Rapide. I do not know where he broke
his journey. Perhaps you do not know that. What I do know is that he
arrived here on Wednesday morning, and not on Tuesday morning."

"Monsieur is mistaken," said Marie stolidly.

Poirot rose to his feet.

"Then the law must take its course," he murmured. "A pity."

"What do you mean, Monsieur?" asked Marie, with a shade of uneasiness.

"You will be arrested and held as accomplices concerned in the murder
of Mrs. Kettering, the English lady who was killed."

"Murder!"

The man's face had gone chalk white, his knees knocked together. Marie
dropped the rolling-pin and began to weep.

"But it is impossible--impossible. I thought--"

"Since you stick to your story, there is nothing to be said. I think
you are both foolish."

He was turning towards the door when an agitated voice arrested him.

"Monsieur, Monsieur, just a little moment. I--I had no idea that it was
anything of this kind. I--I thought it was just a matter concerning a
lady. There have been little awkwardnesses with the police over ladies
before. But murder--that is very different."

"I have no patience with you," cried Poirot. He turned round on them
and angrily shook his fist in Hippolyte's face. "Am I to stop here all
day, arguing with a couple of imbeciles thus? It is the truth I want.
If you will not give it to me, that is your look out. _For the last
time, when did Monsieur le Comte arrive at the Villa Marina--Tuesday
morning or Wednesday morning?_"

"Wednesday," gasped the man, and behind him Marie nodded confirmation.

Poirot regarded them for a minute or two, then inclined his head
gravely.

"You are wise, my children," he said quietly. "Very nearly you were in
serious trouble."

He left the Villa Marina, smiling to himself.

"One guess, confirmed," he murmured to himself. "Shall I take a chance
on the other?"

It was six o'clock when the card of Monsieur Hercule Poirot was
brought up to Mirelle. She stared at it for a moment or two, and then
nodded. When Poirot entered, he found her walking up and down the room
feverishly. She turned on him furiously.

"Well?" she cried. "Well? What is it now? Have you not tortured me
enough, all of you? Have you not made me betray my poor Dereek? What
more do you want?"

"Just one little question, Mademoiselle. After the train left Lyons,
when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"What is that?"

Poirot looked at her with an air of mild reproach and began again.

"I say when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"I never did."

"And found her--"

"I never did."

"_Ah, sacré!_"

He turned on her in a rage and shouted at her, so that she cowered back
before him.

"Will you lie to me? I tell you I know what happened as well as though
I had been there. You went into her compartment and you found her
dead. I tell you I know it. To lie to me is dangerous. Be careful,
Mademoiselle Mirelle."

Her eyes wavered beneath his gaze and fell.

"I--I didn't--" she began uncertainly and stopped.

"There is only one thing about which I wonder," said Poirot--"I wonder,
Mademoiselle, if you found what you were looking for or whether--"

"Whether what?"

"Or whether some one else had been before you."

"I will answer no more questions," screamed the dancer. She tore
herself away from Poirot's restraining hand, and flinging herself down
on the floor in a frenzy, she screamed and sobbed. A frightened maid
came rushing in.

Hercule Poirot shrugged his shoulders, raised his eyebrows, and quietly
left the room.

But he seemed satisfied.




                     30. Miss Viner Gives Judgment


Katherine looked out of Miss Viner's bedroom window. It was raining,
not violently, but with a quiet, well-bred persistence. The window
looked out on a strip of front garden with a path down to the gate and
neat little flower-beds on either side, where later roses and pinks and
blue hyacinths would bloom.

Miss Viner was lying in a large Victorian bedstead. A tray with the
remains of breakfast had been pushed to one side and she was busy
opening her correspondence and making various caustic comments upon it.

Katherine had an open letter in her hand and was reading it through for
the second time. It was dated from the Ritz Hotel, Paris.

    "_Chère Mademoiselle Katherine" (it began)--"I trust that you are
    in good health and that the return to the English winter has not
    proved too depressing. Me, I prosecute my inquiries with the utmost
    diligence. Do not think that it is the holiday that I take here.
    Very shortly I shall be in England, and I hope then to have the
    pleasure of meeting you once more. It shall be so, shall it not?
    On arrival in London I shall write to you. You remember that we
    are the colleagues in this affair? But indeed I think you know that
    very well._

    "_Be assured, Mademoiselle, of my most respectful and devoted
    sentiments._

                                                    "_Hercule Poirot._"

Katherine frowned slightly. It was as though something in the letter
puzzled and intrigued her.

"A choir boys' picnic indeed," came from Miss Viner. "Tommy Saunders
and Albert Dykes ought to be left behind, and I shan't subscribe to it
unless they are. What those two boys think they are doing in church on
Sundays I don't know. Tommy sang, 'O God, make speed to save us,' and
never opened his lips again, and if Albert Dykes wasn't sucking a mint
humbug, my nose is not what it is and always has been."

"I know, they are awful," agreed Katherine.

She opened her second letter, and a sudden flush came to her cheeks.
Miss Viner's voice in the room seemed to recede into the far distance.

When she came back to a sense of her surroundings Miss Viner was
bringing a long speech to a triumphant termination.

"And I said to her, 'Not at all. As it happens, Miss Grey is Lady
Tamplin's own cousin.' What do you think of that?"

"Were you fighting my battles for me? That was very sweet of you."

"You can put it that way if you like. There is nothing to me in a
title. Vicar's wife or no vicar's wife, that woman is a cat. Hinting
you had bought your way into Society."

"Perhaps she was not so very far wrong."

"And look at you," continued Miss Viner. "Have you come back a stuck-up
fine lady, as well you might have done? No, there you are, as sensible
as ever you were, with a pair of good Balbriggan stockings on and
sensible shoes. I spoke to Ellen about it only yesterday. 'Ellen,' I
said, 'you look at Miss Grey. She has been hobnobbing with some of the
greatest in the land, and does she go about as you do with skirts up to
her knees and silk stockings that ladder when you look at them, and the
most ridiculous shoes that ever I set eyes on?'"

Katherine smiled a little to herself; it had apparently been worth
while to conform to Miss Viner's prejudices. The old lady went on with
increasing gusto.

"It has been a great relief to me that you have not had your head
turned. Only the other day I was looking for my cuttings. I have
several about Lady Tamplin and her War Hospital and what not, but I
cannot lay my hand upon them. I wish you would look, my dear; your
eyesight is better than mine. They are all in a box in the bureau
drawer."

Katherine glanced down at the letter in her hand and was about to
speak, but checked herself, and going over to the bureau found the box
of cuttings and began to look over them. Since her return to St. Mary
Mead her heart had gone out to Miss Viner in admiration of the old
woman's stoicism and pluck. She felt that there was little she could
do for her old friend, but she knew from experience how much those
seemingly small trifles meant to old people.

"Here is one," she said presently. "'Viscountess Tamplin, who is
running her villa at Nice as an Officers' Hospital, has just been the
victim of a sensational robbery, her jewels having been stolen. Amongst
them were some very famous emeralds, heirlooms of the Tamplin family.'"

"Probably paste," said Miss Viner; "a lot of these Society women's
jewels are."

"Here is another," said Katherine. "A picture of her, 'A charming
camera study of Viscountess Tamplin with her little daughter Lenox.'"

"Let me look," said Miss Viner. "You can't see much of the child's
face, can you? But I dare say that is just as well. Things go by
contraries in this world and beautiful mothers have hideous children. I
dare say the photographer realized that to take the back of the child's
head was the best thing he could do for her."

Katherine laughed.

"'One of the smartest hostesses on the Riviera this season is
Viscountess Tamplin, who has a villa at Cap Martin. Her cousin, Miss
Grey, who recently inherited a vast fortune in a most romantic manner,
is staying with her there.'"

"That is the one I wanted," said Miss Viner. "I expect there has been
a picture of you in one of the papers that I have missed; you know the
kind of thing. Mrs. Somebody or other Jones-Williams, at the something
or other Point-to-point, usually carrying a shooting-stick and having
one foot lifted up in the air. It must be a trial to some of them to
see what they look like."

Katherine did not answer. She was smoothing out the cutting with her
finger, and her face had a puzzled, worried look. Then she drew the
second letter out of its envelope and mastered its contents once more.
She turned to her friend.

"Miss Viner? I wonder--there is a friend of mine, some one I met on the
Riviera, who wants very much to come down and see me here?"

"A man," said Miss Viner.

"Yes."

"Who is he?"

"He is secretary to Mr. Van Aldin, the American millionaire."

"What is his name?"

"Knighton. Major Knighton."

"Hm--secretary to a millionaire. And wants to come down here. Now,
Katherine, I am going to say something to you for your own good. You
are a nice girl and a sensible girl, and though you have your head
screwed on the right way about most things, every woman makes a fool
of herself once in her life. Ten to one what this man is after is your
money."

With a gesture she arrested Katherine's reply. "I have been waiting
for something of this kind. What is a secretary to a millionaire? Nine
times out of ten it is a young man who likes living soft. A young
man with nice manners and a taste for luxury and no brains and no
enterprise, and if there is anything that is a softer job than being a
secretary to a millionaire it is marrying a rich woman for her money. I
am not saying that you might not be some man's fancy. But you are not
young, and though you have a very good complexion you are not a beauty,
and what I say to you is, don't make a fool of yourself; but if you
are determined to do so, do see that your money is properly tied up on
yourself. There, now I have finished. What have you got to say?"

"Nothing," said Katherine; "but would you mind if he did come to see
me?"

"I wash my hands of it," said Miss Viner. "I have done my duty, and
whatever happens now is on your own head. Would you like him to lunch
or to dinner? I dare say Ellen could manage dinner--that is, if she
didn't lose her head."

"Lunch would be very nice," said Katherine. "It is awfully kind of you,
Miss Viner. He asked me to ring him up, so I will do so and say that
we shall be pleased if he will lunch with us. He will motor down from
town."

"Ellen does a steak with grilled tomatoes pretty fairly," said Miss
Viner. "She doesn't do it well, but she does it better than anything
else. It is no good having a tart because she is heavy handed with
pastry; but her little castle puddings are not bad, and I dare say you
could find a nice piece of Stilton at Abbot's. I have always heard that
gentlemen like a nice piece of Stilton, and there is a good deal of
father's wine left, a bottle of sparkling Moselle, perhaps."

"Oh, no, Miss Viner; that is really not necessary."

"Nonsense, my child. No gentleman is happy unless he drinks something
with his meal. There is some good prewar whisky if you think he
would prefer that. Now do as I say and don't argue. The key of the
wine-cellar is in the third drawer down in the dressing-table, in the
second pair of stockings on the left-hand side."

Katherine went obediently to the spot indicated.

"The second pair, now mind," said Miss Viner. "The first pair has my
diamond earrings and my filigree brooch in it."

"Oh," said Katherine, rather taken aback, "wouldn't you like them put
in your jewel-case?"

Miss Viner gave vent to a terrific and prolonged snort.

"No, indeed! I have much too much sense for that sort of thing, thank
you. Dear, dear, I well remember how my poor father had a safe built in
downstairs. Pleased as Punch he was with it, and he said to my mother,
'Now, Mary, you bring me your jewels in their case every night and I
will lock them away for you.' My mother was a very tactful woman, and
she knew that gentlemen like having their own way, and she brought him
the jewel-case locked up just as he said.

"And one night burglars broke in, and of course--naturally--the first
thing they went for was the safe! It would be, with my father talking
up and down the village and bragging about it until you might have
thought he kept all King Solomon's diamonds there. They made a clean
sweep, got the tankards, the silver cups, and the presentation gold
plate that my father had had presented to him, _and_ the jewel-case."

She sighed reminiscently. "My father was in a great state over my
mother's jewels. There was the Venetian set and some very fine cameos
and some pale pink corals, and two diamond rings with quite large
stones in them. And then, of course, she had to tell him that, being
a sensible woman, she had kept her jewellery rolled up in a pair of
corsets, and there it was still as safe as anything."

"And the jewel-case had been quite empty?"

"Oh no, dear," said Miss Viner, "it would have been too light a weight
then. My mother was a very intelligent woman; she saw to that. She
kept her buttons in the jewel-case, and a very handy place it was.
Boot buttons in the top tray, trouser buttons in the second tray, and
assorted buttons below. Curiously enough, my father was quite annoyed
with her. He said he didn't like deceit. But I mustn't go chattering
on; you want to go and ring up your friend, and mind you choose a
nice piece of steak, and tell Ellen she is not to have holes in her
stockings when she waits at lunch."

"Is her name Ellen or Helen, Miss Viner? I thought--"

Miss Viner closed her eyes.

"I can sound my h's, dear, as well as any one, but Helen is _not_ a
suitable name for a servant. I don't know what the mothers in the lower
classes are coming to nowadays."

The rain had cleared away when Knighton arrived at the cottage. The
pale fitful sunshine shone down on it and burnished Katherine's head
as she stood in the doorway to welcome him. He came up to her quickly,
almost boyishly.

"I say, I hope you don't mind. I simply had to see you again soon. I
hope the friend you are staying with does not mind."

"Come in and make friends with her," said Katherine. "She can be most
alarming, but you will soon find that she has the softest heart in the
world."

Miss Viner was enthroned majestically in the drawing-room, wearing a
complete set of the cameos which had been so providentially preserved
in the family. She greeted Knighton with dignity and an austere
politeness which would have damped many men. Knighton, however, had a
charm of manner which was not easily set aside, and after about ten
minutes Miss Viner thawed perceptibly. Luncheon was a merry meal, and
Ellen, or Helen, in a new pair of silk stockings devoid of ladders
performed prodigies of waiting. Afterwards, Katherine and Knighton went
for a walk and they came back to have tea _tête-à-tête_, since Miss
Viner had gone to lie down.

When the car had finally driven off Katherine went slowly upstairs. A
voice called her and she went in to Miss Viner's bedroom.

"Friend gone?"

"Yes. Thank you so much for letting me ask him down."

"No need to thank me. Do you think I am the sort of old curmudgeon who
never will do anything for anybody?"

"I think you are a dear," said Katherine affectionately.

"Humph," said Miss Viner mollified.

As Katherine was leaving the room she called her back.

"Katherine?"

"Yes."

"I was wrong about that young man of yours. A man when he is making up
to anybody can be cordial and gallant and full of little attentions
and altogether charming. But when a man is really in love he can't
help looking like a sheep. Now, whenever that young man looked at you
he looked like a sheep. I take back all I said this morning. It is
genuine."




                        31. Mr. Aarons Lunches


"Ah!" said Mr. Joseph Aarons, appreciatively.

He took a long draught from his tankard, set it down with a sigh, wiped
the froth from his lips, and beamed across the table at his host,
Monsieur Hercule Poirot.

"Give me," said Mr. Aarons, "a good Porterhouse steak and a tankard of
something worth drinking, and any one can have your French fallals and
whatnots, your ordoovres and your omelettes and your little bits of
quail. Give me," he reiterated, "a Porterhouse steak."

Poirot, who had just complied with this request, smiled sympathetically.

"Not that there is much wrong with a steak and kidney pudding,"
continued Mr. Aarons. "Apple tart? Yes, I will take apple tart, thank
you, Miss, and a jug of cream."

The meal proceeded. Finally, with a long sigh, Mr. Aarons laid down his
spoon and fork preparatory to toying with some cheese before turning
his mind to other matters.

"There was a little matter of business I think you said, Monsieur
Poirot," he remarked. "Anything I can do to help you I am sure I shall
be most happy."

"That is very kind of you," said Poirot. "I said to myself, 'If you
want to know anything about the dramatic profession there is one person
who knows all that is to be known and that is my old friend, Mr. Joseph
Aarons.'"

"And you don't say far wrong," said Mr. Aarons complacently; "whether
it is past, present, or future, Joe Aarons is the man to come to."

"_Précisément._ Now I want to ask you, Monsieur Aarons, what you know
about a young woman called Kidd."

"Kidd? Kitty Kidd?"

"Kitty Kidd."

"Pretty smart, she was. Male impersonator, song and a dance--That one?"

"That is the one."

"_Very_ smart, she was. Made a good income. Never out of an engagement.
Male impersonation mostly, but, as a matter of fact, you could not
touch her as a character actress."

"So I have heard," said Poirot; "but she has not been appearing lately,
has she?"

"No. Dropped right out of things. Went over to France and took up with
some swell nobleman there. She quitted the stage then for good and all,
I guess."

"How long ago was that?"

"Let me see. Three years ago. And she has been a loss--let me tell you
that."

"She was clever?"

"Clever as a cartload of monkeys."

"You don't know the name of the man she became friends with in Paris?"

"He was a swell, I know that. A Count--or was it a Marquis? Now I come
to think of it, I believe it was a Marquis."

"And you know nothing about her since?"

"Nothing. Never even run across her accidentally like. I bet she is
tooling it round some of these foreign resorts. Being a Marquise to the
life. You couldn't put one over on Kitty. She would give as good as she
got any day."

"I see," said Poirot thoughtfully.

"I am sorry I can't tell you more, Monsieur Poirot," said the other. "I
would like to be of use to you if I could. You did me a good turn once."

"Ah, but we are quits on that; you, too, did me a good turn."

"One good turn deserves another. Ha, ha!" said Mr. Aarons.

"Your profession must be a very interesting one," said Poirot.

"So-so," said Mr. Aarons non-committally. "Taking the rough with
the smooth, it is all right. I don't do so badly at it, all things
considered, but you have to keep your eyes skinned. Never know what the
public will jump for next."

"Dancing has come very much to the fore in the last few years,"
murmured Poirot reflectively.

"_I_ never saw anything in this Russian ballet, but people like it. Too
highbrow for me."

"I met one dancer out on the Riviera--Mademoiselle Mirelle."

"Mirelle? She is hot stuff, by all accounts. There is always money
going to back her--though, so far as that goes, the girl can dance; I
have seen her, and I know what I am talking about. I never had much to
do with her myself, but I hear she is a terror to deal with. Tempers
and tantrums all the time."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully; "yes, so I should imagine."

"Temperament!" said Mr. Aarons, "temperament! That is what they call
it themselves. My missus was a dancer before she married me, but I
am thankful to say she never had any temperament. You don't want
temperament in the home, Monsieur Poirot."

"I agree with you, my friend; it is out of place there."

"A woman should be calm and sympathetic, and a good cook," said Mr.
Aarons.

"Mirelle has not been long before the public, has she?" asked Poirot.

"About two and a half years, that is all," said Mr. Aarons. "Some
French Duke started her. I hear now that she has taken up with the
ex-Prime Minister of Greece. These are the chaps who manage to put
money away quietly."

"That is news to me," said Poirot.

"Oh, she's not one to let the grass grow under her feet. They say that
young Kettering murdered his wife on her account. I don't know, I am
sure. Anyway, he is in prison, and she had to look round for herself,
and pretty smart she has been about it. They say she is wearing a ruby
the size of a pigeon's egg--not that I have ever seen a pigeon's egg
myself, but that is what they always call it in works of fiction."

"A ruby the size of a pigeon's egg!" said Poirot. His eyes were green
and cat-like. "How interesting!"

"I had it from a friend of mine," said Mr. Aarons. "But, for all
I know, it may be coloured glass. They are all the same, these
women--they never stop telling tall stories about their jewels. Mirelle
goes about bragging that it has got a curse on it. 'Heart of Fire,' I
think she calls it."

"But if I remember rightly," said Poirot, "the ruby that is named
'Heart of Fire' is the centre stone in a necklace."

"There you are! Didn't I tell you there is no end to the lies women
will tell about their jewellery? This is a single stone, hung on a
platinum chain round her neck; but, as I said before, ten to one it is
a bit of coloured glass."

"No," said Poirot gently; "no--somehow I do not think it is coloured
glass."




                32. Katherine and Poirot Compare Notes


"You have changed, Mademoiselle," said Poirot suddenly. He and
Katherine were seated opposite each other at a small table at the Savoy.

"Yes, you have changed," he continued.

"In what way?"

"Mademoiselle, these _nuances_ are difficult to express."

"I am older."

"Yes, you are older. And by that I do not mean that the wrinkles and
the crows' feet are coming. When I first saw you, Mademoiselle, you
were a looker-on at life. You had the quiet, amused look of one who
sits back in the stalls and watches the play."

"And now?"

"Now, you no longer watch. It is an absurd thing, perhaps, that I
say here, but you have the wary look of a fighter who is playing a
difficult game."

"My old lady is difficult sometimes," said Katherine, with a smile;
"but I can assure you that I don't engage in deadly contests with her.
You must go down and see her some day, Monsieur Poirot. I think you are
one of the people who would appreciate her pluck and her spirit."

There was a silence while the waiter deftly served them with chicken
_en casserole_. When he had departed, Poirot said:

"You have heard me speak of my friend Hastings?--he who said that I was
a human oyster. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, I have met my match in you.
You, far more than I, play a lone hand."

"Nonsense," said Katherine lightly.

"Never does Hercule Poirot talk nonsense. It is as I say."

Again there was a silence. Poirot broke it by inquiring:

"Have you seen any of our Riviera friends since you have been back,
Mademoiselle?"

"I have seen something of Major Knighton."

"A-ha! Is that so?"

Something in Poirot's twinkling eyes made Katherine lower hers.

"So Mr. Van Aldin remains in London?"

"Yes."

"I must try to see him to-morrow or the next day."

"You have news for him?"

"What makes you think that?"

"I--wondered, that is all."

Poirot looked across at her with twinkling eyes.

"And now, Mademoiselle, there is much that you wish to ask me, I can
see that. And why not? Is not the affair of the Blue Train our own
'Roman Policier'?"

"Yes, there are things I should like to ask you."

"_Eh bien?_"

Katherine looked up with a sudden air of resolution.

"What were you doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot?"

Poirot smiled slightly.

"I made a call at the Russian Embassy."

"Oh."

"I see that that tells you nothing. But I will not be a human oyster.
No, I will lay my cards on the table, which is assuredly a thing that
oysters do not do. You suspect, do you not, that I am not satisfied
with the case against Derek Kettering?"

"That is what I have been wondering. I thought, in Nice, that you had
finished with the case."

"You do not say all that you mean, Mademoiselle. But I admit
everything. It was I--my researches--which placed Derek Kettering
where he is now. But for me the Examining Magistrate would still
be vainly trying to fasten the crime on the Comte de la Roche. _Eh
bien_, Mademoiselle, what I have done I do not regret. I have only
one duty--to discover the truth, and that way led straight to Mr.
Kettering. But did it end there? The police say yes, but I, Hercule
Poirot, am not satisfied."

He broke off suddenly. "Tell me, Mademoiselle, have you heard from
Mademoiselle Lenox lately?"

"One very short, scrappy letter. She is, I think, annoyed with me for
coming back to England."

Poirot nodded.

"I had an interview with her the night that Monsieur Kettering was
arrested. It was an interesting interview in more ways than one."

Again he fell silent, and Katherine did not interrupt his train of
thought.

"Mademoiselle," he said at last, "I am now on delicate ground, yet I
will say this to you. There is, I think, some one who loves Monsieur
Kettering--correct me if I am wrong--and for her sake--well--for her
sake I hope that I am right and the police are wrong. You know who that
some one is?"

There was a pause, then Katherine said:

"Yes--I think I know."

Poirot leant across the table towards her.

"I am not satisfied, Mademoiselle; no, I am not satisfied. The facts,
the main facts, led straight to Monsieur Kettering. But there is one
thing that has been left out of account."

"And what is that?"

"The disfigured face of the victim. I have asked myself, Mademoiselle,
a hundred times, 'Was Derek Kettering the kind of man who would deal
that smashing blow after having committed the murder?' What end would
it serve? What purpose would it accomplish? Was it a likely action for
one of Monsieur Kettering's temperament? And, Mademoiselle, the answer
to these questions is profoundly unsatisfactory. Again and again I go
back to that one point--'why?' And the only things I have to help me to
a solution of the problem are these."

He whipped out his pocket-book and extracted something from it which he
held between his finger and thumb.

"Do you remember, Mademoiselle? You saw me take these hairs from the
rug in the railway carriage."

Katherine leant forward, scrutinizing the hairs keenly.

Poirot nodded his head slowly several times.

"They suggest nothing to you, I see that, Mademoiselle. And yet--I
think somehow that you see a good deal."

"I have had ideas," said Katherine slowly, "curious ideas. That is why
I ask you what you were doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot."

"When I wrote to you--"

"From the Ritz?"

A curious smile came over Poirot's face.

"Yes, as you say, from the Ritz. I am a luxurious person
sometimes--when a millionaire pays."

"The Russian Embassy," said Katherine, frowning. "No, I don't see where
that comes in."

"It does not come in directly, Mademoiselle. I went there to get
certain information. I saw a particular personage and I threatened
him--yes, Mademoiselle, I, Hercule Poirot, threatened him."

"With the police?"

"No," said Poirot drily, "with the Press--a much more deadly weapon."

He looked at Katherine and she smiled at him, just shaking her head.

"Are you not just turning back into an oyster again, Monsieur Poirot?"

"No, no! I do not wish to make mysteries. See, I will tell you
everything. I suspect this man of being the active party in the sale
of the jewels of Monsieur Van Aldin. I tax him with it, and in the end
I get the whole story out of him. I learn where the jewels were handed
over, and I learn, too, of the man who paced up and down outside in the
street--a man with a venerable head of white hair, but who walked with
the light, springy step of a young man--and I give that man a name in
my own mind--the name of 'Monsieur le Marquis.'"

"And now you have come to London to see Mr. Van Aldin?"

"Not entirely for that reason. I had other work to do. Since I have
been in London I have seen two more people--a theatrical agent and a
Harley Street doctor. From each of them I have got certain information.
Put these things together, Mademoiselle, and see if you can make of
them the same as I do."

"I?"

"Yes, you. I will tell you one thing, Mademoiselle. There has been a
doubt all along in my mind as to whether the robbery and the murder
were done by the same person. For a long time I was not sure--"

"And now?"

"And now I _know_."

There was a silence. Then Katherine lifted her head. Her eyes were
shining.

"I am not clever like you, Monsieur Poirot. Half the things that you
have been telling me don't seem to me to point anywhere at all. The
ideas that came to me came from such an entirely different angle--"

"Ah, but that is always so," said Poirot quietly. "A mirror shows the
truth, but every one stands in a different place for looking into the
mirror."

"My ideas may be absurd--they may be entirely different from yours,
but--"

"Yes?"

"Tell me, does this help you at all?"

He took a newspaper cutting from her outstretched hand. He read it and,
looking up, he nodded gravely.

"As I told you, Mademoiselle, one stands at a different angle for
looking into the mirror, but it is the same mirror and the same things
are reflected there."

Katherine got up. "I must rush," she said. "I have only just time to
catch my train. Monsieur Poirot--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle."

"It--it mustn't be much longer, you understand. I--I can't go on much
longer."

There was a break in her voice.

He patted her hand reassuringly.

"Courage, Mademoiselle, you must not fail now; the end is very near."




                           33. A New Theory


"Monsieur Poirot wants to see you, sir."

"Damn the fellow!" said Van Aldin.

Knighton remained sympathetically silent.

Van Aldin got up from his chair and paced up and down.

"I suppose you have seen the cursed newspapers this morning?"

"I have glanced at them, sir."

"Still at it hammer and tongs?"

"I am afraid so, sir."

The millionaire sat down again and pressed his hand to his forehead.

"If I had had an idea of this," he groaned. "I wish to God I had
never got that little Belgian to ferret out the truth. Find Ruth's
murderer--that was all I thought about."

"You wouldn't have liked your son-in-law to go scot free?"

Van Aldin sighed.

"I would have preferred to take the law into my own hands."

"I don't think that would have been a very wise proceeding, sir."

"All the same--are you sure the fellow wants to see me?"

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin. He is very urgent about it."

"Then I suppose he will have to. He can come along this morning if he
likes."

It was a very fresh and debonair Poirot who was ushered in. He did
not seem to see any lack of cordiality in the millionaire's manner,
and chatted pleasantly about various trifles. He was in London, he
explained, to see his doctor. He mentioned the name of an eminent
surgeon.

"No, no, _pas la guerre_--a memory of my days in the police force, a
bullet of a rascally Apache."

He touched his left shoulder and winced realistically.

"I always consider you a lucky man, Monsieur Van Aldin; you are
not like our popular idea of American millionaires, martyrs to the
dyspepsia."

"I am pretty tough," said Van Aldin. "I lead a very simple life, you
know; plain fare and not too much of it."

"You have seen something of Miss Grey, have you not?" inquired Poirot,
innocently turning to the secretary.

"I--yes; once or twice," said Knighton.

He blushed slightly and Van Aldin exclaimed in surprise:

"Funny you never mentioned to me that you had seen her, Knighton?"

"I didn't think you would be interested, sir."

"I like that girl very much," said Van Aldin.

"It is a thousand pities that she should have buried herself once more
in St. Mary Mead," said Poirot.

"It is very fine of her," said Knighton hotly. "There are very
few people who would bury themselves down there to look after a
cantankerous old woman who has no earthly claim on her."

"I am silent," said Poirot, his eyes twinkling a little; "but all the
same I say it is a pity. And now, Messieurs, let us come to business."

Both the other men looked at him in some surprise.

"You must not be shocked or alarmed at what I am about to say.
Supposing, Monsieur Van Aldin, that, after all, Monsieur Derek
Kettering did not murder his wife?"

"What?"

Both men stared at him in blank surprise.

"Supposing, I say, that Monsieur Kettering did not murder his wife?"

"Are you mad, Monsieur Poirot?"

It was Van Aldin who spoke.

"No," said Poirot, "I am not mad. I am eccentric, perhaps--at least
certain people say so; but as regards my profession, I am very much, as
one says, 'all there.' I ask you, Monsieur Van Aldin, whether you would
be glad or sorry if what I tell you should be the case?"

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Naturally I should be glad," he said at last. "Is this an exercise in
suppositions, Monsieur Poirot, or are there any facts behind it?"

Poirot looked at the ceiling.

"There is an off-chance," he said quietly, "that it might be the Comte
de la Roche after all. At least I have succeeded in upsetting his
alibi."

"How did you manage that?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders modestly.

"I have my own methods. The exercise of a little tact, a little
cleverness--and the thing is done."

"But the rubies," said Van Aldin, "these rubies that the Count had in
his possession were false."

"And clearly he would not have committed the crime except for the
rubies. But you are overlooking one point, Monsieur Van Aldin. Where
the rubies were concerned, some one might have been before him."

"But this is an entirely new theory," cried Knighton.

"Do you really believe all this rigmarole, Monsieur Poirot?" demanded
the millionaire.

"The thing is not proved," said Poirot quietly. "It is as yet only a
theory, but I tell you this, Monsieur Van Aldin, the facts are worth
investigating. You must come out with me to the south of France and go
into the case on the spot."

"You really think this is necessary--that I should go, I mean."

"I thought it would be what you yourself would wish," said Poirot.

There was a hint of reproach in his tone which was not lost upon the
other.

"Yes, yes, of course," he said. "When do you wish to start, Monsieur
Poirot?"

"You are very busy at present, sir," murmured Knighton.

But the millionaire had now made up his mind, and he waved the other's
objections aside.

"I guess this business comes first," he said. "All right, Monsieur
Poirot, to-morrow. What train?"

"We will go, I think, by the Blue Train," said Poirot, and he smiled.




                       34. The Blue Train Again


"The Millionaire's Train," as it is sometimes called, swung round a
curve of line at what seemed a dangerous speed. Van Aldin, Knighton,
and Poirot sat together in silence. Knighton and Van Aldin had two
compartments connecting with each other, as Ruth Kettering and her maid
had had on the fateful journey. Poirot's own compartment was further
along the coach.

The journey was a painful one for Van Aldin, recalling as it did the
most agonizing memories. Poirot and Knighton conversed occasionally in
low tones without disturbing him.

When, however, the train had completed its slow journey round the
_ceinture_ and reached the Gare de Lyon, Poirot became suddenly
galvanized into activity. Van Aldin realized that part of his object in
travelling by the train had been to attempt to reconstruct the crime.
Poirot himself acted every part. He was in turn the maid, hurriedly
shut into her own compartment, Mrs. Kettering, recognizing her husband
with surprise and a trace of anxiety, and Derek Kettering discovering
that his wife was travelling on the train. He tested various
possibilities, such as the best way for a person to conceal himself in
the second compartment.

Then suddenly an idea seemed to strike him. He clutched at Van Aldin's
arm.

"_Mon Dieu_, but that is something I have not thought of! We must break
our journey in Paris. Quick, quick, let us alight at once."

Seizing suit-cases he hurried from the train. Van Aldin and Knighton,
bewildered but obedient, followed him. Van Aldin having once formed his
opinion of Poirot's ability was slow to part from it. At the barrier
they were held up. Their tickets were in charge of the conductor of the
train, a fact which all three of them had forgotten.

Poirot's explanations were rapid, fluent, and impassioned, but they
produced no effect upon the stolid-faced official.

"Let us get quit of this," said Van Aldin abruptly. "I gather you are
in a hurry, Monsieur Poirot. For God's sake pay the fares from Calais
and let us get right on with whatever you have got in your mind."

But Poirot's flood of language had suddenly stopped dead, and he had
the appearance of a man turned to stone. His arm, still outflung in an
impassioned gesture, remained there as though stricken with paralysis.

"I have been an imbecile," he said simply. "_Ma foi_, I lose my
head nowadays. Let us return and continue our journey quietly. With
reasonable luck the train will not have gone."

They were only just in time, the train moving off as Knighton, the last
of the three, swung himself and his suitcase on board.

The conductor remonstrated with them feelingly, and assisted them to
carry their luggage back to their compartments. Van Aldin said nothing,
but he was clearly disgusted at Poirot's extraordinary conduct. Alone
with Knighton for a moment or two, he remarked:

"This is a wildgoose chase. The man has lost his grip on things. He has
got brains up to a point, but any man who loses his head and scuttles
round like a frightened rabbit is no earthly darned good."

Poirot came to them in a moment or two, full of abject apologies and
clearly so crestfallen that harsh words would have been superfluous.
Van Aldin received his apologies gravely, but managed to restrain
himself from making acid comments.

They had dinner on the train, and afterwards, somewhat to the surprise
of the other two, Poirot suggested that they should all three set up in
Van Aldin's compartment.

The millionaire looked at him curiously.

"Is there anything that you are keeping back from us, Monsieur Poirot?"

"I?" Poirot opened his eyes in innocent surprise. "But what an idea."

Van Aldin did not answer, but he was not satisfied. The conductor was
told that he need not make up the beds. Any surprise he might have felt
was obliterated by the largeness of the tip which Van Aldin handed to
him. The three men sat in silence. Poirot fidgeted and seemed restless.
Presently he turned to the secretary.

"Major Knighton, is the door of your compartment bolted? The door into
the corridor, I mean."

"Yes; I bolted it myself just now."

"Are you sure?" said Poirot.

"I will go and make sure, if you like," said Knighton smiling.

"No, no, do not derange yourself. I will see for myself."

He passed through the connecting door and returned in a second or two,
nodding his head.

"Yes, yes, it is as you said. You must pardon an old man's fussy ways."

He closed the connecting door and resumed his place in the right-hand
corner.

The hours passed. The three men dozed fitfully, waking with
uncomfortable starts. Probably never before had three people booked
berths on the most luxurious train available, then declined to avail
themselves of the accommodations they had paid for. Every now and then
Poirot glanced at his watch, and then nodded his head and composed
himself to slumber once more. On one occasion he rose from his seat
and opened the connecting door, peered sharply into the adjoining
compartment, and then returned to his seat, shaking his head.

"What is the matter?" whispered Knighton. "You are expecting something
to happen, aren't you?"

"I have the nerves," confessed Poirot. "I am like the cat upon the hot
tiles. Every little noise it makes me jump."

Knighton yawned.

"Of all the darned uncomfortable journeys," he murmured. "I suppose you
know what you are playing at, Monsieur Poirot."

He composed himself to sleep as best he could. Both he and Van Aldin
had succumbed to slumber, when Poirot, glancing for the fourteenth time
at his watch, leant across and tapped the millionaire on the shoulder.

"Eh? What is it?"

"In five or ten minutes, Monsieur, we shall arrive at Lyons."

"My God!" Van Aldin's face looked white and haggard in the dim light.
"Then it must have been about this time that poor Ruth was killed."

He sat staring straight in front of him. His lips twitched a little,
his mind reverting back to the terrible tragedy that had saddened his
life.

There was the usual long screaming sigh of the brake, and the train
slackened speed and drew into Lyons. Van Aldin let down the window and
leant out.

"If it wasn't Derek--if your new theory is correct, it is here that the
man left the train?" he asked over his shoulder.

Rather to his surprise Poirot shook his head.

"No," he said thoughtfully, "no _man_ left the train, but I think--yes,
I think, a _woman_ may have done so."

Knighton gave a gasp.

"A woman?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

"Yes, a woman," said Poirot, nodding his head. "You may not remember,
Monsieur Van Aldin, but Miss Grey in her evidence mentioned that a
youth in a cap and overcoat descended on to the platform ostensibly
to stretch his legs. Me, I think that that youth was most probably a
woman."

"But who was she?"

Van Aldin's face expressed incredulity, but Poirot replied seriously
and categorically.

"Her name--or the name under which she was known, for many years--is
Kitty Kidd, but you, Monsieur Van Aldin, knew her by another
name--_that of Ada Mason_."

Knighton sprang to his feet.

"What?" he cried.

Poirot swung round to him.

"Ah!--before I forget it." He whipped something from a pocket and held
it out.

"Permit me to offer you a cigarette--out of your own cigarette case.
It was careless of you to drop it when you boarded the train on the
_ceinture_ at Paris."

Knighton stood staring at him as though stupefied. Then he made a
movement, but Poirot flung up his hand in a warning gesture.

"No, don't move," he said in a silky voice; "the door into the next
compartment is open, and you are being covered from there this
minute. I unbolted the door into the corridor when we left Paris,
and our friends the police were told to take their places there. As
I expect you know, the French police want you rather urgently, Major
Knighton--or shall we say--Monsieur le Marquis?"




                           35. Explanations


"Explanations?"

Poirot smiled. He was sitting opposite the millionaire at a luncheon
table in the latter's private suite at the Negresco. Facing him was a
relieved but very puzzled man. Poirot leant back in his chair, lit one
of his tiny cigarettes, and stared reflectively at the ceiling.

"Yes, I will give you explanations. It began with the one point that
puzzled me. You know what that point was? _The disfigured face._ It is
not an uncommon thing to find when investigating a crime and it rouses
an immediate question, the question of identity. That naturally was
the first thing that occurred to me. Was the dead woman really Mrs.
Kettering? But that line led me nowhere, for Miss Grey's evidence was
positive and very reliable, so I put that idea aside. The dead woman
_was_ Ruth Kettering."

"When did you first begin to suspect the maid?"

"Not for some time, but one peculiar little point drew my attention to
her. The cigarette case found in the railway carriage and which she
told us was one which Mrs. Kettering had given to her husband. Now that
was, on the face of it, most improbable, seeing the terms that they
were on. It awakened a doubt in my mind as to the general veracity of
Ada Mason's statements. There was the rather suspicious fact to be
taken into consideration, that she had only been with her mistress for
two months. Certainly it did not seem as if she could have had anything
to do with the crime since she had been left behind in Paris and Mrs.
Kettering had been seen alive by several people afterwards, but--"

Poirot leant forward. He raised an emphatic forefinger and wagged it
with intense emphasis at Van Aldin.

"But I am a good detective. I suspect. There is nobody and nothing that
I do not suspect. I believe nothing that I am told. I say to myself:
how do we know that Ada Mason was left behind in Paris? And at first
the answer to that question seemed completely satisfactory. There was
the evidence of your secretary, Major Knighton, a complete outsider
whose testimony might be supposed to be entirely impartial, and there
was the dead woman's own words to the conductor on the train. But I put
the latter point aside for the moment, because a very curious idea--an
idea perhaps fantastic and impossible--was growing up in my mind. If
by any outside chance it happened to be true, that particular piece of
testimony was worthless.

"I concentrated on the chief stumbling-block to my theory, Major
Knighton's statement that he saw Ada Mason at the Ritz after the
Blue Train had left Paris. That seemed conclusive enough, but yet,
on examining the facts carefully, I noted two things. First, that
by a curious coincidence he, too, had been exactly two months in
your service. Secondly, his initial letter was the same--'K.'
Supposing--just supposing--that it was _his_ cigarette case which had
been found in the carriage. Then, if Ada Mason and he were working
together, and she recognized it when we showed it to her, would she
not act precisely as she had done? At first, taken aback, she quickly
evolved a plausible theory that would agree with Mr. Kettering's
guilt. _Bien entendu_, that was not the original idea. The Comte de
la Roche was to be the scapegoat, though Ada Mason would not make her
recognition of him too certain, in case he should be able to prove an
alibi. Now, if you will cast your mind back to that time, you will
remember a significant thing that happened. I suggested to Ada Mason
that the man she had seen was not the Comte de la Roche, but Derek
Kettering. She seemed uncertain at the time, but after I had got back
to my hotel you rang me up and told me that she had come to you and
said that, on thinking it over, she was now quite convinced that the
man in question _was_ Mr. Kettering. I had been expecting something of
the kind. There could be but one explanation of this sudden certainty
on her part. After my leaving your hotel, she had had time to consult
with somebody, and had received instructions which she acted upon.
Who had given her these instructions? Major Knighton. And there was
another very small point, which might mean nothing or might mean a
great deal. In casual conversation Knighton had talked of a jewel
robbery in Yorkshire in a house where he was staying. Perhaps a mere
coincidence--perhaps another small link in the chain."

"But there is one thing I do not understand, Monsieur Poirot. I guess I
must be dense or I would have seen it before now. Who was the man in
the train at Paris? Derek Kettering or the Comte de la Roche?"

"That is the simplicity of the whole thing. _There was no man._
Ah--_mille tonnerres!_--do you not see the cleverness of it all? Whose
word have we for it that there ever was a man there? Only Ada Mason's.
And we believe in Ada Mason because of Knighton's evidence that she was
left behind in Paris."

"But Ruth herself told the conductor that she had left her maid behind
there," demurred Van Aldin.

"Ah! I am coming to that. We have Mrs. Kettering's own evidence there,
but, on the other hand, we have not really got her evidence, because,
Monsieur Van Aldin, a dead woman cannot give evidence. It is not _her_
evidence, but the evidence of the conductor of the train--a very
different affair altogether."

"So you think the man was lying?"

"No, no, not at all. He spoke what he thought to be the truth. But the
woman who told him that she had left her maid in Paris was not Mrs.
Kettering."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Monsieur Van Aldin, Ruth Kettering was dead before the train arrived
at the Gare de Lyon. It was Ada Mason, dressed in her mistress's very
distinctive clothing, who purchased a dinner basket and who made that
very necessary statement to the conductor."

"Impossible!"

"No, no, Monsieur Van Aldin; not impossible. _Les femmes_, they look
so much alike nowadays that one identifies them more by their clothing
than by their faces. Ada Mason was the same height as your daughter.
Dressed in that very sumptuous fur coat and the little red lacquer hat
jammed down over her eyes, with just a bunch of auburn curls showing
over each ear, it was no wonder that the conductor was deceived. He
had not previously spoken to Mrs. Kettering, you remember. True, he
had seen the maid just for a moment when she handed him the tickets,
but his impression had been merely that of a gaunt, black-clad female.
If he had been an unusually intelligent man, he might have gone so far
as to say that mistress and maid were not unlike, but it is extremely
unlikely that he would even think that. And remember, Ada Mason, or
Kitty Kidd, was an actress, able to change her appearance and tone
of voice at a moment's notice. No, no; there was no danger of his
recognizing the maid in the mistress's clothing, but there _was_ the
danger that when he came to discover the body he might realize it was
not the woman he had talked to the night before. And now we see the
reason for the disfigured face. The chief danger that Ada Mason ran was
that Katherine Grey might visit her compartment after the train left
Paris, and she provided against that difficulty by ordering a dinner
basket and by locking herself in her compartment."

"But who killed Ruth--and when?"

"First, bear it in mind that the crime was planned and undertaken by
the two of them--Knighton and Ada Mason, working together. Knighton
was in Paris that day on your business. He boarded the train somewhere
on its way round the _ceinture_. Mrs. Kettering would be surprised,
but she would be quite unsuspicious. Perhaps he draws her attention to
something out the window, and as she turns to look he slips the cord
round her neck--and the whole thing is over in a second or two. The
door of the compartment is locked, and he and Ada Mason set to work.
They strip off the dead woman's outer clothes. Mason and Knighton
roll the body up in a rug and put it on the seat in the adjoining
compartment amongst the bags and suit-cases. Knighton drops off the
train, taking the jewel-case containing the rubies with him. Since the
crime is not supposed to have been committed until nearly twelve hours
later he is perfectly safe, and his evidence and the supposed Mrs.
Kettering's words to the conductor will provide a perfect alibi for his
accomplice.

"At the Gare de Lyon Ada Mason gets a dinner basket, and shutting
herself into the toilet compartment she quickly changes into her
mistress's clothes, adjusts two false bunches of auburn curls, and
generally makes up to resemble her as closely as possible. When the
conductor comes to make up the bed, she tells him the prepared story
about having left her maid behind in Paris; and whilst he is making up
the berth, she stands looking out of the window, so that her back is
towards the corridor and people passing along there. That was a wise
precaution, because, as we know, Miss Grey was one of those passing,
and she, among others, was willing to swear that Mrs. Kettering was
still alive at that hour."

"Go on," said Van Aldin.

"Before getting to Lyons, Ada Mason arranged her mistress's body in
the bunk, folded up the dead woman's clothes neatly on the end of it,
and herself changed into a man's clothes and prepared to leave the
train. When Derek Kettering entered his wife's compartment, and, as
he thought, saw her asleep in her berth, the scene had been set, and
Ada Mason was hidden in the next compartment waiting for the moment to
leave the train unobserved. As soon as the conductor had swung himself
down on to the platform at Lyons, she follows, slouching along as
though just taking a breath of air. At a moment when she is unobserved,
she hurriedly crosses to the other platform, and takes the first train
back to Paris and the Ritz Hotel. Her name has been registered there as
taking a room the night before by one of Knighton's female accomplices.
She has nothing to do but wait there placidly for your arrival. The
jewels are not, and never have been, in her possession. No suspicion
attaches to him, and, as your secretary, he brings them to Nice
without the least fear of discovery. Their delivery there to Monsieur
Papopolous is already arranged for and they are entrusted to Mason at
the last moment to hand over to the Greek. Altogether a very neatly
planned coup, as one would expect from a master of the game such as the
Marquis."

"And you honestly mean that Richard Knighton is a well-known criminal,
who has been at this business for years?"

Poirot nodded.

"One of the chief assets of the gentleman called the Marquis was
his plausible, ingratiating manner. You fell a victim to his charm,
Monsieur Van Aldin, when you engaged him as a secretary on such a
slight acquaintanceship."

"I could have sworn that he never angled for the post," cried the
millionaire.

"It was very astutely done--so astutely done that it deceived a man
whose knowledge of other men is as great as yours is."

"I looked up his antecedents too. The fellow's record was excellent."

"Yes, yes; that was part of the game. As Richard Knighton his life
was quite free from reproach. He was well born, well connected, did
honourable service in the War, and seemed altogether above suspicion;
but when I came to glean information about the mysterious Marquis,
I found many points of similarity. Knighton spoke French like a
Frenchman, he had been in America, France, and England at much the
same time as the Marquis was operating. The Marquis was last heard
of as engineering various jewel robberies in Switzerland, and it was
in Switzerland that you had come across Major Knighton; and it was at
precisely that time that the first rumours were going round of your
being in treaty for the famous rubies."

"But why murder?" murmured Van Aldin brokenly. "Surely a clever thief
could have stolen the jewels without running his head into a noose."

Poirot shook his head. "This is not the first murder that lies to the
Marquis's charge. He is a killer by instinct; he believes, too, in
leaving no evidence behind him. Dead men and women tell no tales.

"The Marquis had an intense passion for famous and historical jewels.
He laid his plans far beforehand by installing himself as your
secretary and getting his accomplice to obtain the situation of maid
with your daughter, for whom he guessed the jewels were destined.
And, though this was his matured and carefully thought-out plan, he
did not scruple to attempt a shortcut by hiring a couple of Apaches
to waylay you in Paris on the night you bought the jewels. That plan
failed, which hardly surprised him, I think. This plan was, so he
thought, completely safe. No possible suspicion could attach to Richard
Knighton. But like all great men--and the Marquis was a great man--he
had his weaknesses. He fell genuinely in love with Miss Grey, and
suspecting her liking for Derek Kettering, he could not resist the
temptation to saddle him with the crime when the opportunity presented
itself. And now, Monsieur Van Aldin, I am going to tell you something
very curious. Miss Grey is not a fanciful woman by any means, yet she
firmly believes that she felt your daughter's presence beside her one
day in the Casino Gardens at Monte Carlo, just after she had been
having a long talk with Knighton. She was convinced, she says, that the
dead woman was urgently trying to tell her something, and it suddenly
came to her that what the dead woman was trying to say was that
Knighton was her murderer! The idea seemed so fantastic at the time
that Miss Grey spoke of it to no one. But she was so convinced of its
truth that she acted on it--wild as it seemed. She did not discourage
Knighton's advances, and she pretended to him that she was convinced of
Derek Kettering's guilt."

"Extraordinary," said Van Aldin.

"Yes, it is very strange. One cannot explain these things. Oh, by the
way, there is one little point that baffled me considerably. Your
secretary has a decided limp--the result of a wound that he received
in the War. Now the Marquis most decidedly did not limp. That was a
stumbling-block. But Miss Lenox Tamplin happened to mention one day
that Knighton's limp had been a surprise to the surgeons who had
been in charge of the case in her mother's hospital. That suggested
camouflage. When I was in London I went to the surgeon in question, and
I got several technical details from him which confirmed me in that
belief. I mentioned the name of that surgeon in Knighton's hearing the
day before yesterday. The natural thing would have been for Knighton to
mention that he had been attended by him during the War, but he said
nothing--and that little point, if nothing else, gave me the last final
assurance that my theory of the crime was correct. Miss Grey, too,
provided me with a cutting, showing that there had been a robbery at
Lady Tamplin's hospital during the time that Knighton had been there.
She realized that I was on the same track as herself when I wrote to
her from the Ritz in Paris.

"I had some trouble in my inquiries there, but I got what I
wanted--evidence that Ada Mason arrived on the morning after the crime
and not on the evening of the day before."

There was a long silence, then the millionaire stretched out a hand to
Poirot across the table.

"I guess you know what this means to me, Monsieur Poirot," he said
huskily. "I am sending you round a cheque in the morning, but no cheque
in the world will express what I feel about what you have done for me.
You are the goods, Monsieur Poirot. Every time, you are the goods."

Poirot rose to his feet; his chest swelled.

"I am only Hercule Poirot," he said modestly, "yet, as you say, in my
own way I am a big man, even as you also are a big man. I am glad and
happy to have been of service to you. Now I go to repair the damages
caused by travel. Alas! my excellent Georges is not with me."

In the lounge of the hotel he encountered a friend--the venerable
Monsieur Papopolous, his daughter Zia beside him.

"I thought you had left Nice, Monsieur Poirot," murmured the Greek as
he took the detective's affectionately proffered hand.

"Business compelled me to return, my dear Monsieur Papopolous."

"Business?"

"Yes, business. And talking of business, I hope your health is better,
my dear friend?"

"Much better. In fact, we are returning to Paris to-morrow."

"I am enchanted to hear such good news. You have not completely ruined
the Greek ex-Minister, I hope."

"I?"

"I understand you sold him a very wonderful ruby which--strictly _entre
nous_--is being worn by Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer?"

"Yes," murmured Monsieur Papopolous; "yes, that is so."

"A ruby not unlike the famous 'Heart of Fire'."

"It has points of resemblance, certainly," said the Greek casually.

"You have a wonderful hand with jewels, Monsieur Papopolous. I
congratulate you. Mademoiselle Zia, I am desolate that you are
returning to Paris so speedily. I had hoped to see some more of you now
that my business is accomplished."

"Would one be indiscreet if one asked what that business was?" asked
Monsieur Papopolous.

"Not at all, not at all. I have just succeeded in laying the Marquis by
the heels."

A far-away look came over Monsieur Papopolous' noble countenance.

"The Marquis?" he murmured; "now why does that seem familiar to me?
No--I cannot recall it."

"You would not, I am sure," said Poirot. "I refer to a very notable
criminal and jewel robber. He has just been arrested for the murder of
the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"Indeed? How interesting these things are!"

A polite exchange of farewells followed, and when Poirot was out of
earshot, Monsieur Papopolous turned to his daughter.

"Zia," he said, with feeling, "that man is the devil!"

"I like him."

"I like him myself," admitted Monsieur Papopolous. "But he is the
devil, all the same."




                            36. By the Sea


The mimosa was nearly over. The scent of it in the air was faintly
unpleasant. There were pink geraniums twining along the balustrade of
Lady Tamplin's villa, and masses of carnations below sent up a sweet,
heavy perfume. The Mediterranean was at its bluest. Poirot sat on the
terrace with Lenox Tamplin. He had just finished telling her the same
story he had told to Van Aldin two days before. Lenox had listened to
him with absorbed attention, her brows knitted and her eyes sombre.

When he had finished she said simply:

"And Derek?"

"He was released yesterday."

"And he has gone--where?"

"He left Nice last night."

"For St. Mary Mead?"

"Yes, for St. Mary Mead."

There was a pause.

"I was wrong about Katherine," said Lenox. "I thought she did not care."

"She is very reserved. She trusts no one."

"She might have trusted me," said Lenox, with a shade of bitterness.

"Yes," said Poirot gravely, "she might have trusted you. But
Mademoiselle Katherine has spent a great deal of her life listening,
and those who have listened do not find it easy to talk; they keep
their sorrows and joys to themselves and tell no one."

"I was a fool," said Lenox; "I thought she really cared for Knighton.
I ought to have known better. I suppose I thought so because--well, I
hoped so."

Poirot took her hand and gave it a little friendly squeeze. "Courage,
Mademoiselle," he said gently.

Lenox looked very straight out across the sea, and her face, in its
ugly rigidity, had for the moment a tragic beauty.

"Oh, well," she said at last, "it would not have done. I am too young
for Derek; he is like a kid that has never grown up. He wants the
Madonna touch."

There was a long silence, then Lenox turned to him quickly and
impulsively. "But I _did_ help, Monsieur Poirot--at any rate I did
help."

"Yes, Mademoiselle. It was you who gave me the first inkling of the
truth when you said that the person who committed the crime need not
have been on the train at all. Before that, I could not see how the
thing had been done."

Lenox drew a deep breath.

"I am glad," she said; "at any rate--that is something."

From far behind them there came a long-drawn-out scream of an engine's
whistle.

"That is that damned Blue Train," said Lenox. "Trains are relentless
things, aren't they, Monsieur Poirot? People are murdered and die, but
they go on just the same. I am talking nonsense, but you know what I
mean."

"Yes, yes, I know. Life is like a train, Mademoiselle. It goes on. And
it is a good thing that that is so."

"Why?"

"Because the train gets to its journey's end at last, and there is a
proverb about that in your language, Mademoiselle."

"'Journeys end in lovers meeting.'" Lenox laughed. "That is not going
to be true for me."

"Yes--yes, it is true. You are young, younger than you yourself know.
Trust the train, Mademoiselle, for it is _le bon Dieu_ who drives it."

The whistle of the engine came again.

"Trust the train, Mademoiselle," murmured Poirot again. "And trust
Hercule Poirot. He knows."
Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)







Typographical errors have been corrected. A list follows the etext.
With a few exceptions, the spelling of French words has not been
normalized or corrected. (note of etext transcriber)




_SPECIAL LIMITED EDITION_

TRILBY

A Novel

_By_

GEORGE DU  MAURIER

AUTHOR OF

"PETER IBBETSON" "THE MARTIAN"
"SOCIAL PICTORIAL SATIRE"

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
BY THE AUTHOR

[Illustration: "_Aux nouvelles que j'apporte,
Vos beaux yeux vont pleurer!_"]

NEW YORK
INTERNATIONAL BOOK AND PUBLISHING COMPANY
1899

_This volume is issued for sale in
paper covers only._

Copyright, 1894, 1899, by HARPER & BROTHERS.

_All rights reserved._

[Illustration: "_IT WAS TRILBY!_" [See page 317]]

    _"Hélas! Je sais un chant d'amour,
     Triste et gai, tour à tour!"_




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE

"IT WAS TRILBY!"                                           _Frontispiece_

TAFFY, ALIAS TALBOT WYNNE                                              4

"THE LAIRD OF COCKPEN"                                                 5

"THE THIRD HE WAS 'LITTLE BILLEE'"                                     7

"IT DID ONE GOOD TO LOOK AT HIM"                                       9

AMONG THE OLD MASTERS                                                 13

"WISTFUL AND SWEET"                                                   17

THE "ROSEMONDE" OF SCHUBERT                                           21

TRILBY'S LEFT FOOT                                                    27

THE FLEXIBLE FLAGEOLET                                                31

THE BRIDGE OF ARTS                                                    34

"THREE MUSKETEERS OF THE BRUSH"                                       39

TAFFY MAKES THE SALAD                                                 43

"THE GLORY THAT WAS GREECE"                                           47

TRILBY'S FOREBEARS                                                    52

TAIL-PIECE                                                            56

"AS BAD AS THEY MAKE 'EM"                                             59

"A VOICE HE DIDN'T UNDERSTAND"                                        63

"AND SO, NO MORE"                                                     67

"'TWO ENGLANDERS IN ONE DAY'"                                         70

"'HIMMEL! THE ROOF OF YOUR MOUTH'"                                    73

"'ÇA FERA UNE FAMEUSE CRAPULE DE MOINS!'"                             77

"'AV YOU SEEN MY FAHZER'S OLE SHOES?'"                                81

TAFFY À L'ÉCHELLE!                                                    85

"THE FOX AND THE CROW"                                                89

THE LATIN QUARTER                                                     92

CUISINE BOURGEOISE EN BOHÈME                                          95

"THE SOFT EYES"                                                       98

ILYSSUS                                                              101

"'VOILÀ L'ESPAYCE DE HOM KER JER SWEE!'"                             105

TIT FOR TAT                                                          111

THE HAPPY LIFE                                                       116

"'LET ME GO, TAFFY...'"                                              119

"'QU'EST CE QU'IL A DONC, CE LITREBILI?'"                            121

REPENTANCE                                                           125

CONFESSION                                                           129

"ALL AS IT USED TO BE"                                               133

"TWIN GRAY STARS"                                                    135

"AN INCUBUS"                                                         137

THE CAPITALIST AND THE SWELL                                         141

"'I WILL NOT! I WILL NOT!'"                                          151

DODOR IN HIS GLORY                                                   153

HÔTEL DE LA ROCHEMARTEL                                              155

CHRISTMAS EVE                                                        161

"'ALLONS GLYCÈRE! ROUGIS MON VERRE....'"                             163

SOUVENIR                                                             168

"MY SISTER DEAR"                                                     173

A DUCAL FRENCH FIGHTING-COCK                                         175

"'ANSWER ME, TRILBY!'"                                               179

A CARY_HAT_IDE                                                       180

"'LES GLOUGLOUX DU VIN À QUAT' SOUS....'"                            183

"'IS SHE A _LADY_, MR. WYNNE?'"                                      187

"'_FOND_ OF HIM? AREN'T _YOU_?'"                                     191

"SO LIKE LITTLE BILLEE"                                              195

"'I MUST TAKE THE BULL BY THE HORNS'"                                199

"'TRILBY! WHERE IS SHE?'"                                            203

LA SŒUR DE LITREBILI                                                 205

"HE FELL A-WEEPING, QUITE DESPERATELY"                               207

"THE SWEET MELODIC PHRASE"                                           211

"SORROWFULLY, ARM IN ARM"                                            215

DEMORALIZATION                                                       225

FRED WALKER                                                          227

_PLATONIC LOVE_                                                      230

"DARLINGS, OLD OR YOUNG"                                             235

"THE MOON-DIAL"                                                      237

THE CHAIRMAN                                                         239

A HAPPY DINNER                                                       245

"A-SMOKIN' THEIR POIPES AND CIGYARS"                                 247

"BONJOUR, SUZON!"                                                    253

A HUMAN NIGHTINGALE                                                  257

CUP-AND-BALL                                                         263

SWEET ALICE                                                          267

"MAY HEAVEN GO WITH HER!"                                            272

"'SO MUCH FOR ALICE, TRAY'"                                          277

"'YOU'RE A _THIEF_, SIR!'"                                           287

"AN ATMOSPHERE OF BANK-NOTES AND GOLD"                               293

"A LITTLE PICTURE OF THE THAMES"                                     296

"'AH! THE BEAUTIFUL INTERMENT, MESSIEURS!'"                          301

"PAUVRE TRILBY".                                                     303

"'JE PRONG!'"                                                        307

"'OON PAIR DE GONG BLONG'"                                           311

GECKO                                                                315

"AU CLAIR DE LA LUNE"                                                319

"OUVRE-MOI TA PORTE POUR L'AMOUR DE DIEU!"                           322

"MALBROUCK S'EN VA-T'EN GUERRE"                                      325

"AUX NOUVELLES QUE J'APPORTE, VOS BEAUX YEUX VONT PLEURER!".         329

UN IMPROMPTU DE CHOPIN                                               331

"AND THE REMEMBRANCE OF THEM--HAND IN HAND"                          338

"'I BELIEVE YOU, MY BOY!'"                                           341

"MAMAN DUCHESSE"                                                     351

THE CUT DIRECT                                                       354

"PETIT ENFANT, J'AIMAIS D'UN AMOUR TENDRE...."                       358

"'VITE! VITE! UN COMMISSAIRE DE POLICE!'"                            363

"I SUPPOSE YOU DO ALL THIS KIND OF THING FOR MERE AMUSEMENT,
MR. WYNNE?"                                                          367

THE FIRST VIOLIN LOSES HIS TEMPER                                    373

"HAST THOU FOUND ME, O MINE ENEMY?"                                  375

"'OH, DON'T YOU REMEMBER SWEET ALICE, BEN BOLT?'"                    377

"THE LAST THEY SAW OF SVENGALI"                                      383

"'THREE NICE CLEAN ENGLISHMEN'"                                      386

"PŒNA PEDE CLAUDO"                                                   389

"THE OLD STUDIO"                                                     391

"'ET MAINTENANT DORS, MA MIGNONNE!'"                                 395

"TAFFY WAS ALLOWED TO SEE GECKO"                                     400

A FAIR BLANCHISSEUSE DE FIN                                          403

A THRONE IN BOHEMIA                                                  407

"'OH, MY POOR GIRL! MY POOR GIRL!'"                                  410

"'AH, POOR MAMMA! SHE WAS EVER SO MUCH PRETTIER THAN THAT!'"         416

"'TO SING LIKE THAT IS _TO PRAY_!'"                                  422

"'THE REMEMBRANCE OF THAT PALM SUNDAY!'"                             425

FOR GECKO                                                            431

"OUT OF THE MYSTERIOUS EAST"                                         432

"'SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!...'"                           437

"TOUT VIENT À POINT, POUR QUI SAIT ATTENDRE!"                        439

"I, PETE COELESTES...."                                              441

"PETITS BONHEURS DE CONTREBANDE"                                     447

ENTER GECKO                                                          451

"'WE TOOK HER VOICE NOTE BY NOTE'"                                   455

THE NIGHTINGALE'S FIRST SONG                                         459

"'ICH HABE _GELIEBT UND GELEBET_!'"                                  461

TAIL-PIECE                                                           464




TRILBY

Part First

    "Mimi Pinson est une blonde,
       Une blonde que l'on connaît;
     Elle n'a qu'une robe au monde,
       Landérirette! et qu'un bonnet!"


It was a fine, sunny, showery day in April.

The big studio window was open at the top, and let in a pleasant breeze
from the northwest. Things were beginning to look shipshape at last. The
big piano, a semi-grand by Broadwood, had arrived from England by "the
Little Quickness" (_la Petite Vitesse_, as the goods trains are called
in France), and lay, freshly tuned, alongside the eastern wall; on the
wall opposite was a panoply of foils, masks, and boxing-gloves.

A trapeze, a knotted rope, and two parallel cords, supporting each a
ring, depended from a huge beam in the ceiling. The walls were of the
usual dull red, relieved by plaster casts of arms and legs and hands and
feet; and Dante's mask, and Michael Angelo's altorilievo of Leda and the
swan, and a centaur and Lapith from the Elgin marbles--on none of these
had the dust as yet had time to settle.

There were also studies in oil from the nude; copies of Titian,
Rembrandt, Velasquez, Rubens, Tintoret, Leonardo da Vinci--none of the
school of Botticelli, Mantegna, and Co.--a firm whose merits had not as
yet been revealed to the many.

Along the walls, at a great height, ran a broad shelf, on which were
other casts in plaster, terra-cotta, imitation bronze; a little Theseus,
a little Venus of Milo, a little discobolus; a little flayed man
threatening high heaven (an act that seemed almost pardonable under the
circumstances!); a lion and a boar by Barye; an anatomical figure of a
horse with only one leg left and no ears; a horse's head from the
pediment of the Parthenon, earless also; and the bust of Clytie, with
her beautiful low brow, her sweet wan gaze, and the ineffable forward
shrug of her dear shoulders that makes her bosom a nest, a rest, a
pillow, a refuge--to be loved and desired forever by generation after
generation of the sons of men.

Near the stove hung a gridiron, a frying-pan, a toasting-fork, and a
pair of bellows. In an adjoining glazed corner cupboard were plates and
glasses, black-handled knives, pewter spoons, and three-pronged steel
forks; a salad-bowl, vinegar cruets, an oil-flask, two mustard-pots
(English and French), and such like things--all scrupulously clean. On
the floor, which had been stained and waxed at considerable cost, lay
two chetah-skins and a large Persian praying-rug. One-half of it,
however (under the trapeze and at the farthest end from the window,
beyond the model throne), was covered with coarse matting, that one
might fence or box without slipping down and splitting one's self in
two, or fall without breaking any bones.

Two other windows of the usual French size and pattern, with shutters to
them and heavy curtains of baize, opened east and west, to let in dawn
or sunset, as the case might be, or haply keep them out. And there were
alcoves, recesses, irregularities, odd little nooks and corners, to be
filled up as time wore on with endless personal knick-knacks, bibelots,
private properties and acquisitions--things that make a place genial,
homelike, and good to remember, and sweet to muse upon (with fond
regret) in after-years.

And an immense divan spread itself in width and length and delightful
thickness just beneath the big north window, the business window--a
divan so immense that three well-fed, well-contented Englishmen could
all lie lazily smoking their pipes on it at once without being in each
other's way, and very often did!

At present one of these Englishmen--a Yorkshireman, by-the-way, called
Taffy (and also the Man of Blood, because he was supposed to be
distantly related to a baronet)--was more energetically engaged.
Bare-armed, and in his shirt and trousers, he was twirling a pair of
Indian clubs round his head. His face was flushed, and he was perspiring
freely and looked fierce. He was a very big young man, fair, with kind
but choleric blue eyes, and the muscles of his brawny arm were strong as
iron bands.

For three years he had borne her Majesty's commission, and had been
through the Crimean campaign without a scratch. He would have been one
of the famous six hundred in the famous charge at Balaklava but for a
sprained ankle (caught playing leapfrog in the trenches), which kept him
in hospital on that momentous day. So that he lost his chance of glory
or the grave, and this humiliating misadventure had sickened him of
soldiering for life, and he never quite got over it. Then, feeling
within himself an irresistible vocation for art, he had sold out; and
here he was in Paris, hard at work, as we see.

[Illustration: TAFFY, ALIAS TALBOT WYNNE]

He was good-looking, with straight features; but I regret to say that,
besides his heavy plunger's mustache, he wore an immense pair of
drooping auburn whiskers, of the kind that used to be called Piccadilly
weepers, and were afterwards affected by Mr. Sothern in Lord Dundreary.
It was a fashion to do so then for such of our gilded youth as could
afford the time (and the hair); the bigger and fairer the whiskers, the
more beautiful was thought the youth! It seems incredible in these days,
when even her Majesty's household brigade go about with smooth cheeks
and lips, like priests or play-actors.

            "What's become of all the gold
    Used to hang and brush their bosoms ...?"

[Illustration: "THE LAIRD OF COCKPEN"]

Another inmate of this blissful abode--Sandy, the Laird of Cockpen, as
he was called--sat in similarly simple attire at his easel, painting at
a lifelike little picture of a Spanish toreador serenading a lady of
high degree (in broad daylight). He had never been to Spain, but he had
a complete toreador's kit--a bargain which he had picked up for a mere
song in the Boulevard du Temple--and he had hired the guitar. His pipe
was in his mouth--reversed; for it had gone out, and the ashes were
spilled all over his trousers, where holes were often burned in this
way.

Quite gratuitously, and with a pleasing Scotch accent, he began to
declaim:

    "A street there is in Paris famous
       For which no rhyme our language yields;
     Roo Nerve day Petty Shong its name is--
       The New Street of the Little Fields...."

And then, in his keen appreciation of the immortal stanza, he chuckled
audibly, with a face so blithe and merry and well pleased that it did
one good to look at him.

He also had entered life by another door. His parents (good, pious
people in Dundee) had intended that he should be a solicitor, as his
father and grandfather had been before him. And here he was in Paris
famous, painting toreadors, and spouting the "Ballad of the
Bouillabaisse," as he would often do out of sheer lightness of
heart--much oftener, indeed, than he would say his prayers.

Kneeling on the divan, with his elbow on the window-sill, was a third
and much younger youth. The third he was "Little Billee." He had pulled
down the green baize blind, and was looking over the roofs and
chimney-pots of Paris and all about with all his eyes, munching the
while a roll and a savory saveloy, in which there was evidence of much
garlic. He ate with great relish, for he was very hungry; he had been
all the morning at Carrel's studio, drawing from the life.

Little Billee was small and slender, about twenty or twenty-one, and had
a straight white forehead veined with blue, large dark-blue eyes,
delicate, regular features, and coal-black hair. He was also very
graceful and well built, with very small hands and feet, and much better
dressed than his friends, who went out of their way to outdo the
denizens of the quartier latin in careless eccentricity of garb, and
succeeded. And in his winning and handsome face there was just a faint
suggestion of some possible very remote Jewish ancestor--just a tinge of
that strong, sturdy, irrepressible, indomitable, indelible blood which
is of such priceless value in diluted homœopathic doses, like the dry
white Spanish wine called montijo, which is not meant to be taken pure;
but without a judicious admixture of which no sherry can go round the
world and keep its flavor intact; or like the famous bull-dog strain,
which is not beautiful in itself; and yet just for lacking a little of
the same no greyhound can ever hope to be a champion. So, at least, I
have been told by wine-merchants and dog-fanciers--the most veracious
persons that can be. Fortunately for the world, and especially for
ourselves, most of us have in our veins at least a minim of that
precious fluid, whether we know it or show it or not. _Tant pis pour les
autres!_

As Little Billee munched he also gazed at the busy place below--the
Place St. Anatole des Arts--at the old houses opposite, some of which
were being pulled down, no doubt lest they should fall of their own
sweet will. In the gaps between he would see discolored, old, cracked,
dingy walls, with mysterious windows and rusty iron balconies of great
antiquity--sights that set him dreaming dreams of mediæval French love
and wickedness and crime, bygone mysteries of Paris!

[Illustration: "THE THIRD HE WAS 'LITTLE BILLEE'"]

One gap went right through the block, and gave him a glimpse of the
river, the "Cité," and the ominous old Morgue; a little to the right
rose the gray towers of Notre Dame de Paris into the checkered April
sky. Indeed, the top of nearly all Paris lay before him, with a little
stretch of the imagination on his part; and he gazed with a sense of
novelty, an interest and a pleasure for which he could not have found
any expression in mere language.

Paris! Paris!! Paris!!!

The very name had always been one to conjure with, whether he thought of
it as a mere sound on the lips and in the ear, or as a magical written
or printed word for the eye. And here was the thing itself at last, and
he, he himself, ipsissimus, in the very midst of it, to live there and
learn there as long as he liked, and make himself the great artist he
longed to be.

Then, his meal finished, he lit a pipe, and flung himself on the divan
and sighed deeply, out of the over-full contentment of his heart.

He felt he had never known happiness like this, never even dreamed its
possibility. And yet his life had been a happy one. He was young and
tender, was Little Billee; he had never been to any school, and was
innocent of the world and its wicked ways; innocent of French
especially, and the ways of Paris and its Latin quarter. He had been
brought up and educated at home, had spent his boyhood in London with
his mother and sister, who now lived in Devonshire on somewhat
straitened means. His father, who was dead, had been a clerk in the
Treasury.

He and his two friends, Taffy and the Laird, had taken this studio
together. The Laird slept there, in a small bedroom off the studio.
Taffy had a bedroom at the Hôtel de Seine, in the street of that name.
Little Billee lodged at the Hôtel Corneille, in the Place de l'Odéon.

He looked at his two friends, and wondered if any one, living or dead,
had ever had such a glorious pair of chums as these.

Whatever they did, whatever they said, was simply perfect in his eyes;
they were his guides and philosophers as well as his chums. On the other
hand, Taffy and the Laird were as fond of the boy as they could be.

His absolute belief in all they said and did touched them none the less
that they were conscious of its being somewhat in excess of their
deserts. His almost girlish purity of mind amused and charmed them, and
they did all they could to preserve it, even in the quartier latin,
where purity is apt to go bad if it be kept too long.

[Illustration: "IT DID ONE GOOD TO LOOK AT HIM"]

They loved him for his affectionate disposition, his lively and
caressing ways; and they admired him far more than he ever knew, for
they recognized in him a quickness, a keenness, a delicacy of
perception, in matters of form and color, a mysterious facility and
felicity of execution, a sense of all that was sweet and beautiful in
nature, and a ready power of expressing it, that had not been vouchsafed
to them in any such generous profusion, and which, as they ungrudgingly
admitted to themselves and each other, amounted to true genius.

And when one within the immediate circle of our intimates is gifted in
this abnormal fashion, we either hate or love him for it, in proportion
to the greatness of his gift; according to the way we are built.

So Taffy and the Laird loved Little Billee--loved him very much indeed.
Not but what Little Billee had his faults. For instance, he didn't
interest himself very warmly in other people's pictures. He didn't seem
to care for the Laird's guitar-playing toreador, nor for his serenaded
lady--at all events, he never said anything about them, either in praise
or blame. He looked at Taffy's realisms (for Taffy was a realist) in
silence, and nothing tries true friendship so much as silence of this
kind.

But, then, to make up for it, when they all three went to the Louvre, he
didn't seem to trouble much about Titian either, or Rembrandt, or
Velasquez, Rubens, Veronese, or Leonardo. He looked at the people who
looked at the pictures, instead of at the pictures themselves;
especially at the people who copied them, the sometimes charming young
lady painters--and these seemed to him even more charming than they
really were--and he looked a great deal out of the Louvre windows,
where there was much to be seen: more Paris, for instance--Paris, of
which he could never have enough.

But when, surfeited with classical beauty, they all three went and dined
together, and Taffy and the Laird said beautiful things about the old
masters, and quarrelled about them, he listened with deference and rapt
attention, and reverentially agreed with all they said, and afterwards
made the most delightfully funny little pen-and-ink sketches of them,
saying all these beautiful things (which he sent to his mother and
sister at home); so life-like, so real, that you could almost hear the
beautiful things they said; so beautifully drawn that you felt the old
masters couldn't have drawn them better themselves; and so irresistibly
droll that you felt that the old masters could not have drawn them at
all--any more than Milton could have described the quarrel between
Sairey Gamp and Betsy Prig; no one, in short, but Little Billee.

Little Billee took up the "Ballad of the Bouillabaisse" where the Laird
had left it off, and speculated on the future of himself and his
friends, when he should have got to forty years--an almost impossibly
remote future.

These speculations were interrupted by a loud knock at the door, and two
men came in.

First, a tall, bony individual of any age between thirty and forty-five,
of Jewish aspect, well-featured but sinister. He was very shabby and
dirty, and wore a red béret and a large velveteen cloak, with a big
metal clasp at the collar. His thick, heavy, languid, lustreless black
hair fell down behind his ears on to his shoulders, in that
musicianlike way that is so offensive to the normal Englishman. He had
bold, brilliant black eyes, with long, heavy lids, a thin, sallow face,
and a beard of burnt-up black which grew almost from his under eyelids;
and over it his mustache, a shade lighter, fell in two long spiral
twists. He went by the name of Svengali, and spoke fluent French with a
German accent, and humorous German twists and idioms, and his voice was
very thin and mean and harsh, and often broke into a disagreeable
falsetto.

His companion was a little swarthy young man--a gypsy, possibly--much
pitted with the small-pox, and also very shabby. He had large, soft,
affectionate brown eyes, like a King Charles spaniel. He had small,
nervous, veiny hands, with nails bitten down to the quick, and carried a
fiddle and a fiddlestick under his arm, without a case, as though he had
been playing in the street.

"Ponchour, mes enfants," said Svengali. "Che vous amène mon ami Checko,
qui choue du fiolon gomme un anche!"

Little Billee, who adored all "sweet musicianers," jumped up and made
Gecko as warmly welcome as he could in his early French.

"Ha! le biâno!" exclaimed Svengali, flinging his red béret on it, and
his cloak on the ground. "Ch'espère qu'il est pon, et pien t'accord!"

And sitting down on the music-stool, he ran up and down the scales with
that easy power, that smooth, even crispness of touch, which reveal the
master.

[Illustration: AMONG THE OLD MASTERS]

Then he fell to playing Chopin's impromptu in A flat, so beautifully
that Little Billee's heart went nigh to bursting with suppressed
emotion and delight. He had never heard any music of Chopin's before,
nothing but British provincial home-made music--melodies with
variations, "Annie Laurie," "The Last Rose of Summer," "The Blue Bells
of Scotland;" innocent little motherly and sisterly tinklings, invented
to set the company at their ease on festive evenings, and make all-round
conversation possible for shy people; who fear the unaccompanied sound
of their own voices, and whose genial chatter always leaves off directly
the music ceases.

He never forgot that impromptu, which he was destined to hear again one
day in strange circumstances.

Then Svengali and Gecko made music together, divinely. Little
fragmentary things, sometimes consisting but of a few bars, but these
bars of _such_ beauty and meaning! Scraps, snatches, short melodies,
meant to fetch, to charm immediately, or to melt or sadden or madden
just for a moment, and that knew just when to leave off--czardas, gypsy
dances, Hungarian love-plaints, things little known out of eastern
Europe in the fifties of this century, till the Laird and Taffy were
almost as wild in their enthusiasm as Little Billee--a silent enthusiasm
too deep for speech. And when these two great artists left off to smoke,
the three Britishers were too much moved even for that, and there was a
stillness....

Suddenly there came a loud knuckle-rapping at the outer door, and a
portentous voice of great volume, and that might almost have belonged to
any sex (even an angel's), uttered the British milkman's yodel,"Milk
below!" and before any one could say "Entrez," a strange figure
appeared, framed by the gloom of the little antechamber.

It was the figure of a very tall and fully developed young female, clad
in the gray overcoat of a French infantry soldier, continued netherwards
by a short striped petticoat, beneath which were visible her bare white
ankles and insteps, and slim, straight, rosy heels, clean cut and smooth
as the back of a razor; her toes lost themselves in a huge pair of male
list slippers, which made her drag her feet as she walked.

She bore herself with easy, unembarrassed grace, like a person whose
nerves and muscles are well in tune, whose spirits are high, who has
lived much in the atmosphere of French studios, and feels at home in it.

This strange medley of garments was surmounted by a small bare head with
short, thick, wavy brown hair, and a very healthy young face, which
could scarcely be called quite beautiful at first sight, since the eyes
were too wide apart, the mouth too large, the chin too massive, the
complexion a mass of freckles. Besides, you can never tell how beautiful
(or how ugly) a face may be till you have tried to draw it.

But a small portion of her neck, down by the collar-bone, which just
showed itself between the unbuttoned lapels of her military coat collar,
was of a delicate privetlike whiteness that is never to be found on any
French neck, and very few English ones. Also, she had a very fine brow,
broad and low, with thick level eyebrows much darker than her hair, a
broad, bony, high bridge to her short nose, and her full, broad cheeks
were beautifully modelled. She would have made a singularly handsome
boy.

As the creature looked round at the assembled company and flashed her
big white teeth at them in an all-embracing smile of uncommon width and
quite irresistible sweetness, simplicity, and friendly trust, one saw at
a glance that she was out of the common clever, simple, humorous,
honest, brave, and kind, and accustomed to be genially welcomed wherever
she went. Then suddenly closing the door behind her, dropping her smile,
and looking wistful and sweet, with her head on one side and her arms
akimbo, "Ye're all English, now, aren't ye?" she exclaimed. "I heard the
music, and thought I'd just come in for a bit, and pass the time of day:
you don't mind? Trilby, that's my name--Trilby O'Ferrall."

She said this in English, with an accent half Scotch and certain French
intonations, and in a voice so rich and deep and full as almost to
suggest an incipient tenore robusto; and one felt instinctively that it
was a real pity she wasn't a boy, she would have made such a jolly one.

"We're delighted, on the contrary," said Little Billee, and advanced a
chair for her.

But she said, "Oh, don't mind me; go on with the music," and sat herself
down cross-legged on the model-throne near the piano.

As they still looked at her, curious and half embarrassed, she pulled a
paper parcel containing food out of one of the coat-pockets, and
exclaimed:

[Illustration: "WISTFUL AND SWEET"]

"I'll just take a bite, if you don't object; I'm a model, you know, and
it's just rung twelve--'the rest.' I'm posing for Durien the sculptor,
on the next floor. I pose to him for the altogether."

"The altogether?" asked Little Billee.

"Yes--_l'ensemble_, you know--head, hands, and
feet--everything--especially feet. That's my foot," she said, kicking
off her big slipper and stretching out the limb. "It's the handsomest
foot in all Paris. There's only one in all Paris to match it, and here
it is," and she laughed heartily (like a merry peal of bells), and stuck
out the other.

And in truth they were astonishingly beautiful feet, such as one only
sees in pictures and statues--a true inspiration of shape and color, all
made up of delicate lengths and subtly modulated curves and noble
straightnesses and happy little dimpled arrangements in innocent young
pink and white.

So that Little Billee, who had the quick, prehensile, æsthetic eye, and
knew by the grace of Heaven what the shapes and sizes and colors of
almost every bit of man, woman, or child should be (and so seldom are),
was quite bewildered to find that a real, bare, live human foot could be
such a charming object to look at, and felt that such a base or pedestal
lent quite an antique and Olympian dignity to a figure that seemed just
then rather grotesque in its mixed attire of military overcoat and
female petticoat, and nothing else!

Poor Trilby!

The shape of those lovely slender feet (that were neither large nor
small), fac-similed in dusty, pale plaster of Paris, survives on the
shelves and walls of many a studio throughout the world, and many a
sculptor yet unborn has yet to marvel at their strange perfection, in
studious despair.

For when Dame Nature takes it into her head to do her very best, and
bestow her minutest attention on a mere detail, as happens now and
then--once in a blue moon, perhaps--she makes it uphill work for poor
human art to keep pace with her.

It is a wondrous thing, the human foot--like the human hand; even more
so, perhaps; but, unlike the hand, with which we are so familiar, it is
seldom a thing of beauty in civilized adults who go about in leather
boots or shoes.

So that it is hidden away in disgrace, a thing to be thrust out of sight
and forgotten. It can sometimes be very ugly, indeed--the ugliest thing
there is, even in the fairest and highest and most gifted of her sex;
and then it is of an ugliness to chill and kill romance, and scatter
young love's dream, and almost break the heart.

And all for the sake of a high heel and a ridiculously pointed toe--mean
things, at the best!

Conversely, when Mother Nature has taken extra pains in the building of
it, and proper care or happy chance has kept it free of lamentable
deformations, indurations, and discolorations--all those grewsome
boot-begotten abominations which have made it so generally
unpopular--the sudden sight of it, uncovered, comes as a very rare and
singularly pleasing surprise to the eye that has learned how to see!

Nothing else that Mother Nature has to show, not even the human face
divine, has more subtle power to suggest high physical distinction,
happy evolution, and supreme development; the lordship of man over
beast, the lordship of man over man, the lordship of woman over all!

_En, voilà, de l'éloquence--à propos de bottes!_

Trilby had respected Mother Nature's special gift to herself--had never
worn a leather boot or shoe, had always taken as much care of her feet
as many a fine lady takes of her hands. It was her one coquetry, the
only real vanity she had.

Gecko, his fiddle in one hand and his bow in the other, stared at her in
open-mouthed admiration and delight, as she ate her sandwich of
soldier's bread and _fromage à la crème_ quite unconcerned.

When she had finished she licked the tips of her fingers clean of
cheese, and produced a small tobacco-pouch from another military pocket,
and made herself a cigarette, and lit it and smoked it, inhaling the
smoke in large whiffs, filling her lungs with it, and sending it back
through her nostrils, with a look of great beatitude.

Svengali played Schubert's "Rosemonde," and flashed a pair of
languishing black eyes at her with intent to kill.

But she didn't even look his way. She looked at Little Billee, at big
Taffy, at the Laird, at the casts and studies, at the sky, the
chimney-pots over the way, the towers of Notre Dame, just visible from
where she sat.

Only when he finished she exclaimed: "Maïe, aïe! c'est rudement bien
tapé, c'te musique-là! Seulement, c'est pas gai, vous savez! Comment
q'ça s'appelle?"

"It is called the 'Rosemonde' of Schubert, matemoiselle," replied
Svengali. (I will translate.)

[Illustration: THE "ROSEMONDE" OF SCHUBERT]

"And what's that--Rosemonde?" said she.

"Rosemonde was a princess of Cyprus, matemoiselle, and Cyprus is an
island."

"Ah, and Schubert, then--where's that?"

"Schubert is not an island, matemoiselle. Schubert was a compatriot of
mine, and made music, and played the piano, just like me."

"Ah, Schubert was a _monsieur_, then. Don't know him; never heard his
name."

"That is a pity, matemoiselle. He had some talent. You like this better,
perhaps," and he strummed,

    "Messieurs les étudiants,
     S'en vont à la chaumière
     Pour y danser le cancan,"

striking wrong notes, and banging out a bass in a different key--a
hideously grotesque performance.

"Yes, I like that better. It's gayer, you know. Is that also composed by
a compatriot of yours?" asked the lady.

"Heaven forbid, matemoiselle."

And the laugh was against Svengali.

But the real fun of it all (if there was any) lay in the fact that she
was perfectly sincere.

"Are you fond of music?" asked Little Billee.

"Oh, ain't I, just!" she replied. "My father sang like a bird. He was a
gentleman and a scholar, my father was. His name was Patrick Michael
O'Ferrall, fellow of Trinity, Cambridge. He used to sing 'Ben Bolt.' Do
you know 'Ben Bolt'?"

"Oh yes, I know it well," said Little Billee. "It's a very pretty
song."

"I can sing it," said Miss O'Ferrall. "Shall I?"

"Oh, certainly, if you will be so kind."

Miss O'Ferrall threw away the end of her cigarette, put her hands on her
knees as she sat cross-legged on the model-throne, and sticking her
elbows well out, she looked up to the ceiling with a tender, sentimental
smile, and sang the touching song,

    "Oh, don't you remember sweet Alice, Ben Bolt?
     Sweet Alice, with hair so brown?" etc., etc.

As some things are too sad and too deep for tears, so some things are
too grotesque and too funny for laughter. Of such a kind was Miss
O'Ferrall's performance of "Ben Bolt."

From that capacious mouth and through that high-bridged bony nose there
rolled a volume of breathy sound, not loud, but so immense that it
seemed to come from all round, to be reverberated from every surface in
the studio. She followed more or less the shape of the tune, going up
when it rose and down when it fell, but with such immense intervals
between the notes as were never dreamed of in any mortal melody. It was
as though she could never once have deviated into tune, never once have
hit upon a true note, even by a fluke--in fact, as though she were
absolutely tone-deaf and without ear, although she stuck to the time
correctly enough.

She finished her song amid an embarrassing silence. The audience didn't
quite know whether it were meant for fun or seriously. One wondered if
she were not paying out Svengali for his impertinent performance of
"Messieurs les étudiants." If so, it was a capital piece of impromptu
tit-for-tat admirably acted, and a very ugly gleam yellowed the tawny
black of Svengali's big eyes. He was so fond of making fun of others
that he particularly resented being made fun of himself--couldn't endure
that any one should ever have the laugh of _him_.

At length Little Billee said: "Thank you so much. It is a capital song."

"Yes," said Miss O'Ferrall. "It's the only song I know, unfortunately.
My father used to sing it, just like that, when he felt jolly after hot
rum and water. It used to make people cry; he used to cry over it
himself. _I_ never do. Some people think I can't sing a bit. All I can
say is that I've often had to sing it six or seven times running in
_lots_ of studios. I vary it, you know--not the words, but the tune. You
must remember that I've only taken to it lately. Do you know Litolff?
Well, he's a great composer, and he came to Durien's the other day, and
I sang 'Ben Bolt,' and what do you think he said? Why, he said Madame
Alboni couldn't go nearly so high or so low as I did, and that her voice
wasn't half so strong. He gave me his word of honor. He said I breathed
as natural and straight as a baby, and all I want is to get my voice a
little more under control. That's what _he_ said."

"Qu'est-ce qu'elle dit?" asked Svengali. And she said it all over again
to him in French--quite French French--of the most colloquial kind. Her
accent was not that of the Comédie Française, nor yet that of the
Faubourg St. Germain, nor yet that of the pavement. It was quaint and
expressive--"funny without being vulgar."

"Barpleu! he was right, Litolff," said Svengali. "I assure you,
matemoiselle, that I have never heard a voice that can equal yours; you
have a talent quite exceptional."

She blushed with pleasure, and the others thought him a "beastly cad"
for poking fun at the poor girl in such a way. And they thought Monsieur
Litolff another.

She then got up and shook the crumbs off her coat, and slipped her feet
into Durien's slippers, saying, in English: "Well, I've got to go back.
Life ain't all beer and skittles, and more's the pity; but what's the
odds, so long as you're happy?"

On her way out she stopped before Taffy's picture--a chiffonnier with
his lantern bending over a dust heap. For Taffy was, or thought himself,
a passionate realist in those days. He has changed, and now paints
nothing but King Arthurs and Guineveres and Lancelots and Elaines and
floating Ladies of Shalott.

"That chiffonnier's basket isn't hitched high enough," she remarked.
"How could he tap his pick against the rim and make the rag fall into it
if it's hitched only half-way up his back? And he's got the wrong
sabots, and the wrong lantern; it's _all_ wrong."

"Dear me!" said Taffy, turning very red; "you seem to know a lot about
it. It's a pity you don't paint, yourself."

"Ah! now you're cross!" said Miss O'Ferrall. "Oh, maïe, aïe!"

She went to the door and paused, looking round benignly. "What nice
teeth you've all three got. That's because you're Englishmen, I suppose,
and clean them twice a day. I do too. Trilby O'Ferrall, that's my name,
48 Rue des Pousse-Cailloux!--pose pour l'ensemble, quand ça l'amuse!
va-t-en ville, et fait tout ce qui concerne son état! Don't forget.
Thanks all, and good-bye."

"En v'là une orichinale," said Svengali.

"I think she's lovely," said Little Billee, the young and tender. "Oh,
heavens, what angel's feet! It makes me sick to think she sits for the
figure. I'm sure she's quite a lady."

And in five minutes or so, with the point of an old compass, he
scratched in white on the dark red wall a three-quarter profile outline
of Trilby's left foot, which was perhaps the more perfect poem of the
two.

Slight as it was, this little piece of impromptu etching, in its sense
of beauty, in its quick seizing of a peculiar individuality, its subtle
rendering of a strongly received impression, was already the work of a
master. It was Trilby's foot, and nobody else's, nor could have been,
and nobody else but Little Billee could have drawn it in just that
inspired way.

"Qu'est-ce que c'est, 'Ben Bolt'?" inquired Gecko.

Upon which Little Billee was made by Taffy to sit down to the piano and
sing it. He sang it very nicely with his pleasant little throaty English
barytone.

[Illustration: TRILBY'S LEFT FOOT]

It was solely in order that Little Billee should have opportunities of
practising this graceful accomplishment of his, for his own and his
friends' delectation, that the piano had been sent over from London,
at great cost to Taffy and the Laird. It had belonged to Taffy's mother,
who was dead.

Before he had finished the second verse, Svengali exclaimed: "Mais c'est
tout-à-fait chentil! Allons, Gecko, chouez-nous ça!"

And he put his big hands on the piano, over Little Billee's, pushed him
off the music-stool with his great gaunt body, and, sitting on it
himself, he played a masterly prelude. It was impressive to hear the
complicated richness and volume of the sounds he evoked after Little
Billee's gentle "tink-a-tink."

And Gecko, cuddling lovingly his violin and closing his upturned eyes,
played that simple melody as it had probably never been played
before--such passion, such pathos, such a tone!--and they turned it and
twisted it, and went from one key to another, playing into each other's
hands, Svengali taking the lead; and fugued and canoned and
counterpointed and battle-doored and shuttlecocked it, high and low,
soft and loud, in minor, in pizzicato, and in sordino--adagio, andante,
allegretto, scherzo--and exhausted all its possibilities of beauty; till
their susceptible audience of three was all but crazed with delight and
wonder; and the masterful Ben Bolt, and his over-tender Alice, and his
too submissive friend, and his old schoolmaster so kind and so true, and
his long-dead schoolmates, and the rustic porch and the mill, and the
slab of granite so gray,

    "And the dear little nook
     By the clear running brook,"

were all magnified into a strange, almost holy poetic dignity and
splendor quite undreamed of by whoever wrote the words and music of that
unsophisticated little song, which has touched so many simple British
hearts that don't know any better--and among them, once, that of the
present scribe--long, long ago!

"Sacrepleu! il choue pien, le Checko, hein?" said Svengali, when they
had brought this wonderful double improvisation to a climax and a close.
"C'est mon élèfe! che le fais chanter sur son fiolon, c'est comme si
c'était _moi_ qui chantais! ach! si ch'afais pour teux sous de voix, che
serais le bremier chanteur du monte! I cannot sing!" he continued. (I
will translate him into English, without attempting to translate his
accent, which is a mere matter of judiciously transposing p's and b's,
and t's and d's, and f's and v's, and g's and k's, and turning the soft
French j into sch, and a pretty language into an ugly one.)

"I cannot sing myself, I cannot play the violin, but I can teach--hein,
Gecko? And I have a pupil--hein, Gecko?--la betite Honorine;" and here
he leered all round with a leer that was not engaging. "The world shall
hear of la betite Honorine some day--hein, Gecko? Listen all--this is
how I teach la betite Honorine! Gecko, play me a little accompaniment in
pizzicato."

And he pulled out of his pocket a kind of little flexible flageolet (of
his own invention, it seems), which he screwed together and put to his
lips, and on this humble instrument he played "Ben Bolt," while Gecko
accompanied him, using his fiddle as a guitar, his adoring eyes fixed in
reverence on his master.

And it would be impossible to render in any words the deftness, the
distinction, the grace, power, pathos, and passion with which this truly
phenomenal artist executed the poor old twopenny tune on his elastic
penny whistle--for it was little more--such thrilling, vibrating,
piercing tenderness, now loud and full, a shrill scream of anguish, now
soft as a whisper, a mere melodic breath, more human almost than the
human voice itself, a perfection unattainable even by Gecko, a master,
on an instrument which is the acknowledged king of all!

So that the tear which had been so close to the brink of Little Billee's
eye while Gecko was playing now rose and trembled under his eyelid and
spilled itself down his nose; and he had to dissemble and
surreptitiously mop it up with his little finger as he leaned his chin
on his hand, and cough a little husky, unnatural cough--_pour se donner
une contenance_!

He had never heard such music as this, never dreamed such music was
possible. He was conscious, while it lasted, that he saw deeper into the
beauty, the sadness of things, the very heart of them, and their
pathetic evanescence, as with a new, inner eye--even into eternity
itself, beyond the veil--a vague cosmic vision that faded when the music
was over, but left an unfading reminiscence of its having been, and a
passionate desire to express the like some day through the plastic
medium of his own beautiful art.

[Illustration: THE FLEXIBLE FLAGEOLET]

When Svengali ended, he leered again on his dumb-struck audience, and
said: "That is how I teach la betite Honorine to sing; that is how I
teach Gecko to play; that is how I teach '_il bel canto_'! It was
lost, the bel canto--but I found it, in a dream--I, and nobody
else--I--Svengali--I--I--_I!_ But that is enough of music; let us play
at something else--let us play at this!" he cried, jumping up and
seizing a foil and bending it against the wall.... "Come along, Little
Pillee, and I will show you something more you don't know...."

So Little Billee took off coat and waistcoat, donned mask and glove and
fencing-shoes, and they had an "assault of arms," as it is nobly called
in French, and in which poor Little Billee came off very badly. The
German Pole fenced wildly, but well.

Then it was the Laird's turn, and he came off badly too; so then Taffy
took up the foil, and redeemed the honor of Great Britain, as became a
British hussar and a Man of Blood. For Taffy, by long and assiduous
practice in the best school in Paris (and also by virtue of his native
aptitudes), was a match for any maître d'armes in the whole French army,
and Svengali got "what for."

And when it was time to give up play and settle down to work, others
dropped in--French, English, Swiss, German, American, Greek; curtains
were drawn and shutters opened; the studio was flooded with light--and
the afternoon was healthily spent in athletic and gymnastic exercises
till dinner-time.

But Little Billee, who had had enough of fencing and gymnastics for the
day, amused himself by filling up with black and white and red
chalk-strokes the outline of Trilby's foot on the wall, lest he should
forget his fresh vision of it, which was still to him as the thing
itself--an absolute reality, born of a mere glance, a mere chance.

Durien came in and looked over his shoulder, and exclaimed: "Tiens! le
pied de Trilby! vous avez fait ça d'après nature?"

"Nong!"

"De mémoire, alors?"

"Wee!"

"Je vous en fais mon compliment! Vous avez eu la main heureuse. Je
voudrais bien avoir fait ça, moi! C'est un petit chef-d'œuvre que
vous avez fait là--tout bonnement, mon cher! Mais vous élaborez trop. De
grâce, n'y touchez plus!"

And Little Billee was pleased, and touched it no more; for Durien was a
great sculptor, and sincerity itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then--well, I happen to forget what sort of day this particular day
turned into at about six of the clock.

If it was decently fine, the most of them went off to dine at the
Restaurant de la Couronne, kept by the Père Trin, in the Rue de
Monsieur, who gave you of his best to eat and drink for twenty sols
Parisis, or one franc in the coin of the empire. Good distending soups,
omelets that were only too savory, lentils, red and white beans, meat so
dressed and sauced and seasoned that you didn't know whether it were
beef or mutton--flesh, fowl, or good red herring--or even bad, for that
matter--nor very greatly care.

And just the same lettuce, radishes, and cheese of Gruyère or Brie as
you got at the Trois Frères Provençaux (but not the same butter!). And
to wash it all down, generous wine in wooden "brocs"--that stained a
lovely æsthetic blue everything it was spilled over.

[Illustration: THE BRIDGE OF ARTS]

And you hobnobbed with models, male and female, students of law and
medicine, painters and sculptors, workmen and blanchisseuses and
grisettes, and found them very good company, and most improving to your
French, if your French was of the usual British kind, and even to some
of your manners, if these were very British indeed. And the evening was
innocently wound up with billiards, cards, or dominos at the Café du
Luxembourg opposite; or at the Théâtre du Luxembourg, in the Rue de
Madame, to see funny farces with screamingly droll Englishmen in them;
or, still better, at the Jardin Bullier (la Closerie des Lilas), to see
the students dance the cancan, or try and dance it yourself, which is
not so easy as it seems; or, best of all, at the Théâtre de l'Odéon, to
see some piece of classical _repertoire_.

Or, if it were not only fine, but a Saturday afternoon into the bargain,
the Laird would put on a necktie and a few other necessary things, and
the three friends would walk arm in arm to Taffy's hotel in the Rue de
Seine, and wait outside till he had made himself as presentable as the
Laird, which did not take very long. And then (Little Billee was always
presentable) they would, arm in arm, the huge Taffy in the middle,
descend the Rue de Seine and cross a bridge to the Cité, and have a look
in at the Morgue. Then back again to the quays on the rive gauche by the
Pont Neuf, to wend their way westward; now on one side to look at the
print and picture shops and the magasins of bric-à-brac, and haply
sometimes buy thereof, now on the other to finger and cheapen the
second-hand books for sale on the parapet, and even pick up one or two
utterly unwanted bargains, never to be read or opened again.

When they reached the Pont des Arts they would cross it, stopping in the
middle to look up the river towards the old Cité and Notre Dame,
eastward, and dream unutterable things, and try to utter them. Then,
turning westward, they would gaze at the glowing sky and all it glowed
upon--the corner of the Tuileries and the Louvre, the many bridges, the
Chamber of Deputies, the golden river narrowing its perspective and
broadening its bed as it went flowing and winding on its way between
Passy and Grenelle to St. Cloud, to Rouen, to the Havre, to England
perhaps--where _they_ didn't want to be just then; and they would try
and express themselves to the effect that life was uncommonly well worth
living in that particular city at that particular time of the day and
year and century, at that particular epoch of their own mortal and
uncertain lives.

Then, still arm in arm and chatting gayly, across the court-yard of the
Louvre, through gilded gates well guarded by reckless imperial Zouaves,
up the arcaded Rue de Rivoli as far as the Rue Castiglione, where they
would stare with greedy eyes at the window of the great corner
pastry-cook, and marvel at the beautiful assortment of bonbons,
pralines, dragées, marrons glacés--saccharine, crystalline substances of
all kinds and colors, as charming to look at as an illumination;
precious stones, delicately frosted sweets, pearls and diamonds so
arranged as to melt in the mouth; especially, at this particular time of
the year, the monstrous Easter-eggs of enchanting hue, enshrined like
costly jewels in caskets of satin and gold; and the Laird, who was well
read in his English classics and liked to show it, would opine that
"they managed these things better in France."

Then across the street by a great gate into the Allée des Feuillants,
and up to the Place de la Concorde--to gaze, but quite without base
envy, at the smart people coming back from the Bois de Boulogne. For
even in Paris "carriage people" have a way of looking bored, of taking
their pleasure sadly, of having nothing to say to each other, as though
the vibration of so many wheels all rolling home the same way every
afternoon had hypnotized them into silence, idiocy, and melancholia.

And our three musketeers of the brush would speculate on the vanity of
wealth and rank and fashion; on the satiety that follows in the wake of
self-indulgence and overtakes it; on the weariness of the pleasures that
become a toil--as if they knew all about it, had found it all out for
themselves, and nobody else had ever found it out before!

Then they found out something else--namely, that the sting of healthy
appetite was becoming intolerable; so they would betake themselves to an
English eating-house in the Rue de la Madeleine (on the left-hand side
near the top), where they would renovate their strength and their
patriotism on British beef and beer, and household bread, and bracing,
biting, stinging yellow mustard, and horseradish, and noble apple-pie,
and Cheshire cheese; and get through as much of these in an hour or so
as they could for talking, talking, talking; such happy talk! as full of
sanguine hope and enthusiasm, of cocksure commendation or condemnation
of all painters, dead or alive, of modest but firm belief in themselves
and each other, as a Paris Easter-egg is full of sweets and pleasantness
(for the young).

And then a stroll on the crowded, well-lighted boulevards, and a bock at
the café there, at a little three-legged marble table right out on the
genial asphalt pavement, still talking nineteen to the dozen.

Then home by dark, old, silent streets and some deserted bridge to their
beloved Latin quarter, the Morgue gleaming cold and still and fatal in
the pale lamplight, and Notre Dame pricking up its watchful twin towers,
which have looked down for so many centuries on so many happy, sanguine,
expansive youths walking arm in arm by twos and threes, and forever
talking, talking, talking....

The Laird and Little Billee would see Taffy safe to the door of his
hôtel garni in the Rue de Seine, where they would find much to say to
each other before they said good-night--so much that Taffy and Little
Billee would see the Laird safe to _his_ door, in the Place St. Anatole
des Arts. And then a discussion would arise between Taffy and the Laird
on the immortality of the soul, let us say, or the exact meaning of the
word "gentleman," or the relative merits of Dickens and Thackeray, or
some such recondite and quite unhackneyed theme, and Taffy and the Laird
would escort Little Billee to _his_ door, in the Place de l'Odéon, and
he would re-escort them both back again, and so on till any hour you
please.

       *       *       *       *       *

Or again, if it rained, and Paris through the studio window loomed
lead-colored, with its shiny slate roofs under skies that were ashen and
sober, and the wild west wind made woful music among the chimney-pots,
and little gray waves ran up the river the wrong way, and the Morgue
looked chill and dark and wet, and almost uninviting (even to three
healthy-minded young Britons), they would resolve to dine and spend a
happy evening at home.

[Illustration: "THREE MUSKETEERS OF THE BRUSH"]

Little Billee, taking with him three francs (or even four), would dive
into back streets and buy a yard or so of crusty new bread, well
burned on the flat side, a fillet of beef, a litre of wine, potatoes and
onions, butter, a little cylindrical cheese called "bondon de
Neufchâtel," tender curly lettuce, with chervil, parsley, spring onions,
and other fine herbs, and a pod of garlic, which would be rubbed on a
crust of bread to flavor things with.

Taffy would lay the cloth Englishwise, and also make the salad, for
which, like everybody else I ever met, he had a special receipt of his
own (putting in the oil first and the vinegar after); and indeed his
salads were quite as good as everybody else's.

The Laird, bending over the stove, would cook the onions and beef into a
savory Scotch mess so cunningly that you could not taste the beef for
the onions--nor always the onions for the garlic!

And they would dine far better than at le Père Trin's, far better than
at the English Restaurant in the Rue de la Madeleine--better than
anywhere else on earth!

And after dinner, what coffee, roasted and ground on the spot, what
pipes and cigarettes of "caporal," by the light of the three shaded
lamps, while the rain beat against the big north window, and the wind
went howling round the quaint old mediæval tower at the corner of the
Rue Vieille des Mauvais Ladres (the old street of the bad lepers), and
the damp logs hissed and crackled in the stove!

What jolly talk into the small hours! Thackeray and Dickens again, and
Tennyson and Byron (who was "not dead yet" in those days); and Titian
and Velasquez, and young Millais and Holman Hunt (just out); and
Monsieur Ingres and Monsieur Delacroix, and Balzac and Stendhal and
George Sand; and the good Dumas! and Edgar Allan Poe; and the glory that
was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome....

Good, honest, innocent, artless prattle--not of the wisest, perhaps, nor
redolent of the very highest culture (which, by-the-way, can mar as well
as make), nor leading to any very practical result; but quite
pathetically sweet from the sincerity and fervor of its convictions, a
profound belief in their importance, and a proud trust in their
life-long immutability.

Oh, happy days and happy nights, sacred to art and friendship! oh, happy
times of careless impecuniosity, and youth and hope and health and
strength and freedom--with all Paris for a playground, and its dear old
unregenerate Latin quarter for a workshop and a home!

And, up to then, no kill-joy complications of love!

No, decidedly no! Little Billee had never known such happiness as
this--never even dreamed of its possibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

A day or two after this, our opening day, but in the afternoon, when the
fencing and boxing had begun and the trapeze was in full swing, Trilby's
"Milk below!" was sounded at the door, and she appeared--clothed this
time in her right mind, as it seemed: a tall, straight, flat-backed,
square-shouldered, deep-chested, full-bosomed young grisette, in a snowy
frilled cap, a neat black gown and white apron, pretty faded,
well-darned, brown stockings, and well-worn, soft, gray, square-toed
slippers of list, without heels and originally shapeless; but which her
feet, uncompromising and inexorable as boot-trees, had ennobled into
everlasting classic shapeliness, and stamped with an unforgettable
individuality, as does a beautiful hand its well-worn glove--a fact
Little Billee was not slow to perceive, with a curious conscious thrill
that was only half æsthetic.

Then he looked into her freckled face, and met the kind and tender
mirthfulness of her gaze and the plucky frankness of her fine wide smile
with a thrill that was not æsthetic at all (nor the reverse), but all of
the heart. And in one of his quick flashes of intuitive insight he
divined far down beneath the shining surface of those eyes (which seemed
for a moment to reflect only a little image of himself against the sky
beyond the big north window) a well of sweetness; and floating somewhere
in the midst of it the very heart of compassion, generosity, and warm
sisterly love; and under that--alas! at the bottom of all--a thin slimy
layer of sorrow and shame. And just as long as it takes for a tear to
rise and gather and choke itself back again, this sudden revelation
shook his nervous little frame with a pang of pity, and the knightly
wish to help. But he had no time to indulge in such soft emotions.
Trilby was met on her entrance by friendly greetings on all sides.

"Tiens! c'est la grande Trilby!" exclaimed Jules Guinot through his
fencing-mask. "Comment! t'es déjà debout après hier soir? Avons-nous
assez rigolé chez Mathieu, hein? Crénom d'un nom, quelle noce! V'là une
crémaillère qui peut se vanter d'être diantrement bien pendue, j'espère!
Et la petite santé, c'matin?"

"Hé, hé! mon vieux," answered Trilby. "Ça boulotte, apparemment! Et toi?
et Victorine? Comment qu'a s'porte à c't'heure? Elle avait un fier coup
d'chasselas! c'est-y jobard, hein? de s'fich 'paf comme ça d'vant
l'monde! Tiens, v'là, Gontran! ça marche-t-y, Gontran, Zouzou d'mon
cœur?"

[Illustration: TAFFY MAKES THE SALAD]

"Comme sur des roulettes, ma biche!" said Gontran, _alias_ l'Zouzou--a
corporal in the Zouaves. "Mais tu t'es donc mise chiffonnière, à
présent? T'as fait banqueroute?"

(For Trilby had a chiffonnier's basket strapped on her back, and carried
a pick and lantern.)

"Mais-z-oui, mon bon!" she said. "Dame! pas d'veine hier soir! t'as bien
vu! Dans la dêche jusqu'aux omoplates, mon pauv' caporal-sous-off! nom
d'un canon--faut bien vivre, s'pas?"

Little Billee's heart sluices had closed during this interchange of
courtesies. He felt it to be of a very slangy kind, because he couldn't
understand a word of it, and he hated slang. All he could make out was
the free use of the "tu" and the "toi," and he knew enough French to
know that this implied a great familiarity, which he misunderstood.

So that Jules Guinot's polite inquiries whether Trilby were none the
worse after Mathieu's house-warming (which was so jolly), Trilby's kind
solicitude about the health of Victorine, who had very foolishly taken a
drop too much on that occasion, Trilby's mock regrets that her own bad
luck at cards had made it necessary that she should retrieve her fallen
fortunes by rag-picking--all these innocent, playful little amenities
(which I have tried to write down just as they were spoken) were couched
in a language that was as Greek to him--and he felt out of it, jealous
and indignant.

"Good-afternoon to you, Mr. Taffy," said Trilby, in English. "I've
brought you these objects of art and virtu to make the peace with you.
They're the real thing, you know. I borrowed 'em from le père Martin,
chiffonnier en gros et en détail, grand officier de la Légion d'Honneur,
membre de l'Institut, et cetera, treize bis, Rue du Puits d'Amour,
rez-de-chaussée, au fond de la cour à gauche, vis-à-vis le
mont-de-piété! He's one of my intimate friends, and--"

"You don't mean to say you're the intimate friend of a _rag-picker_?"
exclaimed the good Taffy.

"Oh yes! Pourquoi pas? I never brag; besides, there ain't any beastly
pride about le père Martin," said Trilby, with a wink. "You'd soon find
that out if _you_ were an intimate friend of his. This is how it's put
on. Do you see? If _you_'ll put it on, I'll fasten it for you, and show
you how to hold the lantern and handle the pick. You may come to it
yourself some day, you know. Il ne faut jurer de rien! Père Martin will
pose for you in person, if you like. He's generally disengaged in the
afternoon. He's poor but honest, you know, and very nice and clean;
quite the gentleman. He likes artists, especially English--they pay. His
wife sells bric-à-brac and old masters: Rembrandts from two francs fifty
upwards. They've got a little grandson--a love of a child. I'm his
god-mother. You know French, I suppose?"

"Oh yes," said Taffy, much abashed. "I'm very much obliged to you--very
much indeed--a--I--a--"

"Y a pas d'quoi!" said Trilby, divesting herself of her basket and
putting it, with the pick and lantern, in a corner. "Et maintenant, le
temps d'absorber une fine de fin sec [a cigarette] et je m'la brise [I'm
off]. On m'attend à l'Ambassade d'Autriche. Et puis zut! Allez toujours,
mes enfants. En avant la boxe!"

She sat herself down cross-legged on the model-throne, and made herself
a cigarette, and watched the fencing and boxing. Little Billee brought
her a chair, which she refused; so he sat down on it himself by her
side, and talked to her, just as he would have talked to any young lady
at home--about the weather, about Verdi's new opera (which she had never
heard), the impressiveness of Notre Dame, and Victor Hugo's beautiful
romance (which she had never read), the mysterious charm of Leonardo da
Vinci's Lisa Gioconda's smile (which she had never seen)--by all of
which she was no doubt rather tickled and a little embarrassed, perhaps
also a little touched.

Taffy brought her a cup of coffee, and conversed with her in polite
formal French, very well and carefully pronounced; and the Laird tried
to do likewise. _His_ French was of that honest English kind that breaks
up the stiffness of even an English party; and his jolly manners were
such as to put an end to all shyness and constraint, and make
self-consciousness impossible.

Others dropped in from neighboring studios--the usual cosmopolite crew.
It was a perpetual come and go in this particular studio between four
and six in the afternoon.

There were ladies, too, _en cheveux_, in caps and bonnets, some of whom
knew Trilby, and thee'd and thou'd with familiar and friendly affection,
while others mademoiselle'd her with distant politeness, and were
mademoiselle'd and madame'd back again. "Absolument comme à l'Ambassade
d'Autriche," as Trilby observed to the Laird, with a British wink that
was by no means ambassadorial.

Then Svengali came and made some of his grandest music, which was as
completely thrown away on Trilby as fireworks on a blind beggar, for all
she held her tongue so piously.

Fencing and boxing and trapezing seemed to be more in her line; and
indeed, to a tone-deaf person, Taffy lunging his full spread with a
foil, in all the splendor of his long, lithe, youthful strength, was a
far gainlier sight than Svengali at the key-board flashing his languid
bold eyes with a sickly smile from one listener to another, as if to
say: "N'est-ce pas que che suis peau! N'est-ce pas que ch'ai tu chénie?
N'est-ce pas que che suis suplime, enfin?"

[Illustration: "THE GLORY THAT WAS GREECE"]

Then enter Durien the sculptor, who had been presented with a baignoire
at the Porte St. Martin to see "La Dame aux Camélias," and he invited
Trilby and another lady to dine with him "au cabaret" and share his box.

So Trilby didn't go to the Austrian embassy after all, as the Laird
observed to Little Billee, with such a good imitation of her wink that
Little Billee was bound to laugh.

But Little Billee was not inclined for fun; a dulness, a sense of
disenchantment, had come over him; as he expressed it to himself, with
pathetic self-pity:

    "A feeling of sadness and longing
       That is not akin to pain,
     And resembles sorrow only
       As the mist resembles the rain."

And the sadness, if he had known, was that all beautiful young women
with kind sweet faces and noble figures and goddess-like extremities
should not be good and pure as they were beautiful; and the longing was
a longing that Trilby could be turned into a young lady--say the vicar's
daughter in a little Devonshire village--his sister's friend and
co-teacher at the Sunday-school; a simple, pure, and pious maiden of
gentle birth.

For he adored piety in woman, although he was not pious by any means.
His inarticulate, intuitive perceptions were not of form and color
secrets only, but strove to pierce the veil of deeper mysteries in
impetuous and dogmatic boyish scorn of all received interpretations. For
he flattered himself that he possessed the philosophical and scientific
mind, and piqued himself on thinking clearly, and was intolerant of
human inconsistency.

That small reserve portion of his ever-active brain which should have
lain fallow while the rest of it was at work or play, perpetually
plagued itself about the mysteries of life and death, and was forever
propounding unanswerable arguments against the Christian belief, through
a kind of inverted sympathy with the believer. Fortunately for his
friends, Little Billee was both shy and discreet, and very tender of
other people's feelings; so he kept all his immature juvenile
agnosticism to himself.

To atone for such ungainly strong-mindedness in one so young and tender,
he was the slave of many little traditional observances which have no
very solid foundation in either science or philosophy. For instance, he
wouldn't walk under a ladder for worlds, nor sit down thirteen to
dinner, nor have his hair cut on a Friday, and was quite upset if he
happened to see the new moon through glass. And he believed in lucky and
unlucky numbers, and dearly loved the sights and scents and sounds of
high-mass in some dim old French cathedral, and found them secretly
comforting.

Let us hope that he sometimes laughed at himself, if only in his sleeve!

And with all his keenness of insight into life he had a well-brought-up,
middle-class young Englishman's belief in the infallible efficacy of
gentle birth--for gentle he considered his own and Taffy's and the
Laird's, and that of most of the good people he had lived among in
England--all people, in short, whose two parents and four grandparents
had received a liberal education and belonged to the professional class.
And with this belief he combined (or thought he did) a proper democratic
scorn for bloated dukes and lords, and even poor inoffensive baronets,
and all the landed gentry--everybody who was born an inch higher up than
himself.

It is a fairly good middle-class social creed, if you can only stick to
it through life in despite of life's experience. It fosters independence
and self-respect, and not a few stodgy practical virtues as well. At all
events, it keeps you out of bad company, which is to be found both above
and below.

And all this melancholy preoccupation, on Little Billee's part, from the
momentary gleam and dazzle of a pair of over-perfect feet in an
over-æsthetic eye, too much enamoured of mere form!

Reversing the usual process, he had idealized from the base upward!

Many of us, older and wiser than Little Billee, have seen in lovely
female shapes the outer garment of a lovely female soul. The instinct
which guides us to do this is, perhaps, a right one, more often than
not. But more often than not, also, lovely female shapes are terrible
complicators of the difficulties and dangers of this earthly life,
especially for their owner, and more especially if she be a humble
daughter of the people, poor and ignorant, of a yielding nature, too
quick to love and trust. This is all so true as to be trite--so trite as
to be a common platitude!

A modern teller of tales, most widely (and most justly) popular, tells
us of heroes and heroines who, like Lord Byron's corsair, were linked
with one virtue and a thousand crimes. And so dexterously does he weave
his story that the young person may read it and learn nothing but good.

My poor heroine was the converse of these engaging criminals: she had
all the virtues but one; but the virtue she lacked (the very one of all
that plays the title-role, and gives its generic name to all the rest of
that goodly company) was of such a kind that I have found it impossible
so to tell her history as to make it quite fit and proper reading for
the ubiquitous young person so dear to us all.

Most deeply to my regret. For I had fondly hoped it might one day be
said of me that whatever my other literary shortcomings might be, I at
least had never penned a line which a pure-minded young British mother
might not read aloud to her little blue-eyed babe as it lies sucking its
little bottle in its little bassinet.

Fate has willed it otherwise.

Would indeed that I could duly express poor Trilby's one shortcoming in
some not too familiar medium--in Latin or Greek, let us say--lest the
young person (in this ubiquitousness of hers, for which Heaven be
praised) should happen to pry into these pages when her mother is
looking another way.

Latin and Greek are languages the young person should not be taught to
understand--seeing that they are highly improper languages, deservedly
dead--in which pagan bards who should have known better have sung the
filthy loves of their gods and goddesses.

But at least am I scholar enough to enter one little Latin plea on
Trilby's behalf--the shortest, best, and most beautiful plea I can think
of. It was once used in extenuation and condonation of the frailties of
another poor weak woman, presumably beautiful, and a far worse offender
than Trilby, but who, like Trilby, repented of her ways, and was most
justly forgiven--

    "Quia multum amavit!"

[Illustration: TRILBY'S FOREBEARS]

Whether it be an aggravation of her misdeeds or an extenuating
circumstance, no pressure of want, no temptations of greed or vanity,
had ever been factors in urging Trilby on her downward career after her
first false step in that direction--the result of ignorance, bad advice
(from her mother, of all people in the world), and base betrayal. She
might have lived in guilty splendor had she chosen, but her wants were
few. She had no vanity, and her tastes were of the simplest, and she
earned enough to gratify them all, and to spare.

So she followed love for love's sake only, now and then, as she would
have followed art if she had been a man--capriciously, desultorily, more
in a frolicsome spirit of camaraderie than anything else. Like an
amateur, in short--a distinguished amateur who is too proud to sell his
pictures, but willingly gives one away now and then to some highly
valued and much admiring friend.

Sheer gayety of heart and genial good-fellowship, the difficulty of
saying nay to earnest pleading. She was "bonne camarade et bonne fille"
before everything. Though her heart was not large enough to harbor more
than one light love at a time (even in that Latin quarter of genially
capacious hearts), it had room for many warm friendships; and she was
the warmest, most helpful, and most compassionate of friends, far more
serious and faithful in friendship than in love.

Indeed, she might almost be said to possess a virginal heart, so little
did she know of love's heartaches and raptures and torments and
clingings and jealousies.

With her it was lightly come and lightly go, and never come back again;
as one or two, or perhaps three, picturesque bohemians of the brush or
chisel had found, at some cost to their vanity and self-esteem; perhaps
even to a deeper feeling--who knows?

Trilby's father, as she had said, had been a gentleman, the son of a
famous Dublin physician and friend of George the Fourth's. He had been a
fellow of his college, and had entered holy orders. He also had all the
virtues but one; he was a drunkard, and began to drink quite early in
life. He soon left the Church, and became a classical tutor, and failed
through this besetting sin of his, and fell into disgrace.

Then he went to Paris, and picked up a few English pupils there, and
lost them, and earned a precarious livelihood from hand to mouth,
anyhow; and sank from bad to worse.

And when his worst was about reached, he married the famous tartaned and
tamoshantered bar-maid at the Montagnards Écossais, in the Rue du
Paradis Poissonnière (a very fishy paradise indeed); she was a most
beautiful Highland lassie of low degree, and she managed to support him,
or helped him to support himself, for ten or fifteen years. Trilby was
born to them, and was dragged up in some way--_à la grâce de Dieu!_

Patrick O'Ferrall soon taught his wife to drown all care and
responsibility in his own simple way, and opportunities for doing so
were never lacking to her.

Then he died, and left a posthumous child--born ten months after his
death, alas! and whose birth cost its mother her life.

Then Trilby became a _blanchisseuse de fin_, and in two or three years
came to grief through her trust in a friend of her mother's. Then she
became a model besides, and was able to support her little brother, whom
she dearly loved.

At the time this story begins, this small waif and stray was "en
pension" with le père Martin, the rag-picker, and his wife, the dealer
in bric-à-brac and inexpensive old masters. They were very good people,
and had grown fond of the child, who was beautiful to look at, and full
of pretty tricks and pluck and cleverness--a popular favorite in the Rue
du Puits d'Amour and its humble neighborhood.

Trilby, for some freak, always chose to speak of him as her godson, and
as the grandchild of le père et la mère Martin, so that these good
people had almost grown to believe he really belonged to them.

And almost every one else believed that he was the child of Trilby (in
spite of her youth), and she was so fond of him that she didn't mind in
the least.

He might have had a worse home.

La mère Martin was pious, or pretended to be; le père Martin was the
reverse. But they were equally good for their kind, and, though coarse
and ignorant and unscrupulous in many ways (as was natural enough), they
were gifted in a very full measure with the saving graces of love and
charity, especially he. And if people are to be judged by their works,
this worthy pair are no doubt both equally well compensated by now for
the trials and struggles of their sordid earthly life.

So much for Trilby's parentage.

And as she sat and wept at Madame Doche's impersonation of la Dame aux
Camélias (with her hand in Durien's) she vaguely remembered, as in a
waking dream, now the noble presence of Taffy as he towered cool and
erect, foil in hand, gallantly waiting for his adversary to breathe,
now the beautiful sensitive face of Little Billee and his deferential
courtesy.

And during the _entr'actes_ her heart went out in friendship to the
jolly Scotch Laird of Cockpen, who came out now and then with such
terrible French oaths and abominable expletives (and in the presence of
ladies, too!), without the slightest notion of what they meant.

For the Laird had a quick ear, and a craving to be colloquial and
idiomatic before everything else, and made many awkward and embarrassing
mistakes.

It would be with him as though a polite Frenchman should say to a fair
daughter of Albion, "D---- my eyes, mees, your tea is getting ---- cold;
let me tell that good old ---- of a Jules to bring you another cup."

And so forth, till time and experience taught him better. It is perhaps
well for him that his first experiments in conversational French were
made in the unconventional circle of the Place St. Anatole des Arts.

[Illustration]




Part Second

    "Dieu! qu'il fait bon la regarder,
       La gracieuse, bonne et belle!
       Pour les grands biens qui sont en elle
     Chacun est prêt de la louer."


Nobody knew exactly how Svengali lived, and very few knew where (or
why). He occupied a roomy dilapidated garret, au sixième, in the Rue
Tire-Liard; with a truckle-bed and a piano-forte for furniture, and very
little else.

He was poor; for in spite of his talent he had not yet made his mark in
Paris. His manners may have been accountable for this. He would either
fawn or bully, and could be grossly impertinent. He had a kind of
cynical humor, which was more offensive than amusing, and always laughed
at the wrong thing, at the wrong time, in the wrong place. And his
laughter was always derisive and full of malice. And his egotism and
conceit were not to be borne; and then he was both tawdry and dirty in
his person; more greasily, mattedly unkempt than even a really
successful pianist has any right to be, even in the best society.

He was not a nice man, and there was no pathos in his poverty--a poverty
that was not honorable, and need not have existed at all; for he was
constantly receiving supplies from his own people in Austria--his old
father and mother, his sisters, his cousins, and his aunts,
hard-working, frugal folk of whom he was the pride and the darling.

He had but one virtue--his love of his art; or, rather, his love of
himself as a master of his art--_the_ master; for he despised, or
affected to despise, all other musicians, living or dead--even those
whose work he interpreted so divinely, and pitied them for not hearing
Svengali give utterance to their music, which of course they could not
utter themselves.

"Ils safent tous un peu toucher du biâno, mais pas grand'chose!"

He had been the best pianist of his time at the Conservatory in Leipsic;
and, indeed, there was perhaps some excuse for this overweening conceit,
since he was able to lend a quite peculiar individual charm of his own
to any music he played, except the highest and best of all, in which he
conspicuously failed.

He had to draw the line just above Chopin, where he reached his highest
level. It will not do to lend your own quite peculiar individual charm
to Handel and Bach and Beethoven; and Chopin is not bad as a
_pis-aller_.

He had ardently wished to sing, and had studied hard to that end in
Germany, in Italy, in France, with the forlorn hope of evolving from
some inner recess a voice to sing with. But nature had been singularly
harsh to him in this one respect--inexorable. He was absolutely without
voice, beyond the harsh, hoarse, weak raven's croak he used to speak
with, and no method availed to make one for him. But he grew to
understand the human voice as perhaps no one has understood it--before
or since.

So in his head he went forever singing, singing, singing, as probably no
human nightingale has ever yet been able to sing out loud for the glory
and delight of his fellow-mortals; making unheard heavenly melody of the
cheapest, trivialest tunes--tunes of the café concert, tunes of the
nursery, the shop-parlor, the guard-room, the school-room, the pothouse,
the slum. There was nothing so humble, so base even, but that his magic
could transform it into the rarest beauty without altering a note. This
seems impossible, I know. But if it didn't, where would the magic come
in?

Whatever of heart or conscience--pity, love, tenderness, manliness,
courage, reverence, charity--endowed him at his birth had been swallowed
up by this one faculty, and nothing of them was left for the common uses
of life. He poured them all into his little flexible flageolet.

Svengali playing Chopin on the piano-forte, even (or especially)
Svengali playing "Ben Bolt" on that penny whistle of his, was as one of
the heavenly host.

[Illustration: "AS BAD AS THEY MAKE 'EM"]

Svengali walking up and down the earth seeking whom he might cheat,
betray, exploit, borrow money from, make brutal fun of, bully if he
dared, cringe to if he must--man, woman, child, or dog--was about as bad
as they make 'em.

To earn a few pence when he couldn't borrow them he played
accompaniments at café concerts, and even then he gave offence; for in
his contempt for the singer he would play too loud, and embroider his
accompaniments with brilliant improvisations of his own, and lift his
hands on high and bring them down with a bang in the sentimental parts,
and shake his dirty mane and shrug his shoulders, and smile and leer at
the audience, and do all he could to attract their attention to himself.
He also gave a few music lessons (not at ladies' schools, let us hope),
for which he was not well paid, presumably, since he was always without
the sou, always borrowing money, that he never paid back, and exhausting
the pockets and the patience of one acquaintance after another.

He had but two friends. There was Gecko, who lived in a little garret
close by in the Impasse des Ramoneurs, and who was second violin in the
orchestra of the Gymnase, and shared his humble earnings with his
master, to whom, indeed, he owed his great talent, not yet revealed to
the world.

Svengali's other friend and pupil was (or rather had been) the
mysterious Honorine, of whose conquest he was much given to boast,
hinting that she was "une jeune femme du monde." This was not the case.
Mademoiselle Honorine Cahen (better known in the quartier latin as Mimi
la Salope) was a dirty, drabby little dolly-mop of a Jewess, a model for
the figure--a very humble person indeed, socially.

She was, however, of a very lively disposition, and had a charming
voice, and a natural gift of singing so sweetly that you forgot her
accent, which was that of the "tout ce qu'il y a de plus canaille."

She used to sit at Carrel's, and during the pose she would sing. When
Little Billee first heard her he was so fascinated that "it made him
sick to think she sat for the figure"--an effect, by-the-way, that was
always produced upon him by all specially attractive figure models of
the gentler sex, for he had a reverence for woman. And before everything
else, he had for the singing woman an absolute worship. He was
especially thrall to the contralto--the deep low voice that breaks and
changes in the middle and soars all at once into a magnified angelic boy
treble. It pierced through his ears to his heart, and stirred his very
vitals.

He had once heard Madame Alboni, and it had been an epoch in his life;
he would have been an easy prey to the sirens! Even beauty paled before
the lovely female voice singing in the middle of the note--the
nightingale killed the bird-of-paradise.

I need hardly say that poor Mimi la Salope had not the voice of Madame
Alboni, nor the art; but it was a beautiful voice of its little kind,
always in the very middle of the note, and her artless art had its quick
seduction.

She sang little songs of Béranger's--"Grand'mère, parlez-nous de lui!"
or "T'en souviens-tu? disait un capitaine--" or "Enfants, c'est moi qui
suis Lisette!" and such like pretty things, that almost brought the
tears to Little Billee's easily moistened eyes.

But soon she would sing little songs that were not by Béranger--little
songs with slang words Little Billee hadn't French enough to understand;
but from the kind of laughter with which the points were received by
the "rapins" in Carrel's studio he guessed these little songs were vile,
though the touching little voice was as that of the seraphim still; and
he knew the pang of disenchantment and vicarious shame.

Svengali had heard her sing at the Brasserie des Porcherons in the Rue
du Crapaud-volant, and had volunteered to teach her; and she went to see
him in his garret, and he played to her, and leered and ogled, and
flashed his bold, black, beady Jew's eyes into hers, and she straightway
mentally prostrated herself in reverence and adoration before this
dazzling specimen of her race.

So that her sordid, mercenary little gutter-draggled soul was filled
with the sight and the sound of him, as of a lordly, godlike,
shawm-playing, cymbal-banging hero and prophet of the Lord God of
Israel--David and Saul in one!

And then he set himself to teach her--kindly and patiently at first,
calling her sweet little pet names--his "Rose of Sharon," his "pearl of
Pabylon," his "cazelle-eyed liddle Cherusalem skylark"--and promised her
that she should be the queen of the nightingales.

But before he could teach her anything he had to unteach her all she
knew; her breathing, the production of her voice, its emission--everything
was wrong. She worked indefatigably to please him, and soon succeeded in
forgetting all the pretty little sympathetic tricks of voice and
phrasing Mother Nature had taught her.

[Illustration: "A VOICE HE DIDN'T UNDERSTAND"]

But though she had an exquisite ear, she had no real musical
intelligence--no intelligence of any kind except about sous and
centimes; she was as stupid as a little downy owl, and her voice was
just a light native warble, a throstle's pipe, all in the head and nose
and throat (a voice he _didn't_ understand, for once), a thing of mere
youth and health and bloom and high spirits--like her beauty, such as it
was--_beauté du diable, beauté damnée_.

She did her very best, and practised all she could in this new way, and
sang herself hoarse: she scarcely ate or slept for practising. He grew
harsh and impatient and coldly severe, and of coarse she loved him all
the more; and the more she loved him the more nervous she got and the
worse she sang. Her voice cracked; her ear became demoralized; her
attempts to vocalize grew almost as comical as Trilby's. So that he lost
his temper completely, and called her terrible names, and pinched and
punched her with his big bony hands till she wept worse than Niobe, and
borrowed money of her--five-franc pieces, even francs and
demifrancs--which he never paid her back; and browbeat and bullied and
ballyragged her till she went quite mad for love of him, and would have
jumped out of his sixth-floor window to give him a moment's pleasure!

He did not ask her to do this--it never occurred to him, and would have
given him no pleasure to speak of. But one fine Sabbath morning (a
Saturday, of course) he took her by the shoulders and chucked her, neck
and crop, out of his garret, with the threat that if she ever dared to
show her face there again he would denounce her to the police--an awful
threat to the likes of poor Mimi la Salope!

"For where did all those five-franc pieces come from--_hein?_--with
which she had tried to pay for all the singing-lessons that had been
thrown away upon her? Not from merely sitting to painters--_hein?_"

Thus the little gazelle-eyed Jerusalem skylark went back to her native
streets again--a mere mud-lark of the Paris slums--her wings clipped,
her spirit quenched and broken, and with no more singing left in her
than a common or garden sparrow--not so much!

And so, no more of "la betite Honorine!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning after this adventure Svengali woke up in his garret with a
tremendous longing to spend a happy day; for it was a Sunday, and a very
fine one.

He made a long arm and reached his waistcoat and trousers off the floor,
and emptied the contents of their pockets on to his tattered blanket; no
silver, no gold, only a few sous and two-sou pieces, just enough to pay
for a meagre _premier déjeuner_!

He had cleared out Gecko the day before, and spent the proceeds (ten
francs, at least) in one night's riotous living--pleasures in which
Gecko had had no share; and he could think of no one to borrow money
from but Little Billee, Taffy, and the Laird, whom he had neglected and
left untapped for days.

So he slipped into his clothes, and looked at himself in what remained
of a little zinc mirror, and found that his forehead left little to be
desired, but that his eyes and temples were decidedly grimy. Wherefore,
he poured a little water out of a little jug into a little basin, and,
twisting the corner of his pocket-handkerchief round his dirty
forefinger, he delicately dipped it, and removed the offending stains.
His fingers, he thought, would do very well for another day or two as
they were; he ran them through his matted black mane, pushed it behind
his ears, and gave it the twist he liked (and that was so much disliked
by his English friends). Then he put on his béret and his velveteen
cloak, and went forth into the sunny streets, with a sense of the
fragrance and freedom and pleasantness of Sunday morning in Paris in the
month of May.

He found Little Billee sitting in a zinc hip-bath, busy with soap and
sponge; and was so tickled and interested by the sight that he quite
forgot for the moment what he had come for.

"Himmel! Why the devil are you doing that?" he asked, in his
German-Hebrew-French.

"Doing _what_?" asked Little Billee, in his French of
Stratford-atte-Bowe.

"Sitting in water and playing with a cake of soap and a sponge!"

"Why, to try and get myself _clean_, I suppose!"

"Ach! And how the devil did you get yourself _dirty_, then?"

To this Little Billee found no immediate answer, and went on with his
ablution after the hissing, splashing, energetic fashion of Englishmen;
and Svengali laughed loud and long at the spectacle of a little
Englishman trying to get himself clean--"tâchant de se nettoyer!"

When such cleanliness had been attained as was possible under the
circumstances, Svengali begged for the loan of two hundred francs, and
Little Billee gave him a five-franc piece.

Content with this, _faute de mieux_, the German asked him when he would
be trying to get himself clean again, as he would much like to come and
see him do it.

"Demang mattang, à votre sairveece!" said Little Billee, with a
courteous bow.

"_What!! Monday too!!_ Gott in Himmel! you try to get yourself clean
_every day_?"

And he laughed himself out of the room, out of the house, out of the
Place de l'Odéon--all the way to the Rue de Seine, where dwelt the "Man
of Blood," whom he meant to propitiate with the story of that original,
Little Billee, trying to get himself clean--that he might borrow another
five-franc piece, or perhaps two.

[Illustration: "AND SO, NO MORE."]

As the reader will no doubt anticipate, he found Taffy in his bath too,
and fell to laughing with such convulsive laughter, such twistings,
screwings, and doublings of himself up, such pointings of his dirty
forefinger at the huge naked Briton, that Taffy was offended, and all
but lost his temper.

"What the devil are you cackling at, sacred head of pig that you are?
Do you want to be pitched out of that window into the Rue de Seine? You
filthy black Hebrew sweep! Just you wait a bit; _I'll_ wash your head
for you!"

And Taffy jumped out of his bath, such a towering figure of righteous
Herculean wrath that Svengali was appalled, and fled.

"Donnerwetter!" he exclaimed, as he tumbled down the narrow staircase of
the Hôtel de Seine; "what for a thick head! what for a pig-dog! what for
a rotten, brutal, verfluchter kerl of an Englander!"

Then he paused for thought.

"Now will I go to that Scottish Englander, in the Place St. Anatole des
Arts, for that other five-franc piece. But first will I wait a little
while till he has perhaps finished trying to get himself clean."

So he breakfasted at the crèmerie Souchet, in the Rue Clopin-Clopant,
and, feeling quite safe again, he laughed and laughed till his very
sides were sore.

Two Englanders in one day--as naked as your hand!--a big one and a
little one, trying to get themselves clean!

He rather flattered himself he'd scored off those two Englanders.

After all, he was right perhaps, from his point of view: you can get as
dirty in a week as in a lifetime, so what's the use of taking such a lot
of trouble? Besides, so long as you are clean enough to suit your kind,
to be any cleaner would be priggish and pedantic, and get you disliked.

Just as Svengali was about to knock at the Laird's door, Trilby came
down-stairs from Durien's, very unlike herself. Her eyes were red with
weeping, and there were great black rings round them; she was pale under
her freckles.

"Fous afez du chacrin, matemoiselle?" asked he.

She told him that she had neuralgia in her eyes, a thing she was subject
to; that the pain was maddening, and generally lasted twenty-four hours.

"Perhaps I can cure you; come in here with me."

The Laird's ablutions (if he had indulged in any that morning) were
evidently over for the day. He was breakfasting on a roll and butter,
and coffee of his own brewing. He was deeply distressed at the sight of
poor Trilby's sufferings, and offered whiskey and coffee and gingernuts,
which she would not touch.

Svengali told her to sit down on the divan, and sat opposite to her, and
bade her look him well in the white of the eyes.

"Recartez-moi pien tans le planc tes yeux."

Then he made little passes and counterpasses on her forehead and temples
and down her cheek and neck. Soon her eyes closed and her face grew
placid. After a while, a quarter of an hour perhaps, he asked her if she
suffered still.

"Oh! presque plus du tout, monsieur--c'est le ciel."

In a few minutes more he asked the Laird if he knew German.

"Just enough to understand," said the Laird (who had spent a year in
Düsseldorf), and Svengali said to him in German: "See, she sleeps not,
but she shall not open her eyes. Ask her."

"Are you asleep, Miss Trilby?" asked the Laird.

"No."

"Then open your eyes and look at me."

She strained her eyes, but could not, and said so.

Then Svengali said, again in German, "She shall not open her mouth. Ask
her."

[Illustration: "'TWO ENGLANDERS IN ONE DAY'"]

"Why couldn't you open your eyes. Miss Trilby?" She strained to open her
mouth and speak, but in vain. "She shall not rise from the divan. Ask
her." But Trilby was spellbound, and could not move.

"I will now set her free," said Svengali.

And, lo! she got up and waved her arms, and cried, "Vive la Prusse! me
v'là guérie!" and in her gratitude she kissed Svengali's hand; and he
leered, and showed his big brown teeth and the yellow whites at the top
of his big black eyes, and drew his breath with a hiss.

"Now I'll go to Durien's and sit. How can I thank you, monsieur? You
have taken all my pain away."

"Yes, matemoiselle. I have got it myself; it is in my elbows. But I love
it, because it comes from you. Every time you have pain you shall come
to me, 12 Rue Tire-Liard, au sixième au-dessus de l'entresol, and I will
cure you and take your pain myself--"

"Oh, you are too good!" and in her high spirits she turned round on her
heel and uttered her portentous war-cry, "Milk below!" The very rafters
rang with it, and the piano gave out a solemn response.

"What is that you say, matemoiselle?"

"Oh! it's what the milkmen say in England."

"It is a wonderful cry, matemoiselle--wunderschön! It comes straight
through the heart; it has its roots in the stomach, and blossoms into
music on the lips like the voice of Madame Alboni--voce sulle labbre! It
is good production--c'est un cri du cœur!"

Trilby blushed with pride and pleasure.

"Yes, matemoiselle! I only know one person in the whole world who can
produce the voice so well as you! I give you my word of honor."

"Who is it, monsieur--yourself?"

"Ach, no, matemoiselle; I have not that privilege. I have unfortunately
no voice to produce.... It is a waiter at the Café de la Rotonde, in the
Palais Royal; when you call for coffee, he says 'Boum!' in basso
profondo. Tiefstimme--F. moll below the line--it is phenomenal! It is
like a cannon--a cannon also has very good production, matemoiselle.
They pay him for it a thousand francs a year, because he brings many
customers to the Café de la Rotonde, where the coffee isn't very good.
When he dies they will search all France for another, and then all
Germany, where the good big waiters come from--and the cannons--but they
will not find him, and the Café de la Rotonde will be bankrupt--unless
you will consent to take his place. Will you permit that I shall look
into your mouth, matemoiselle?"

She opened her mouth wide, and he looked into it.

"Himmel! the roof of your mouth is like the dome of the Panthéon; there
is room in it for 'toutes les gloires de la France,' and a little to
spare! The entrance to your throat is like the middle porch of St.
Sulpice when the doors are open for the faithful on All-Saints' day; and
not one tooth is missing--thirty-two British teeth as white as milk and
as big as knuckle-bones! and your little tongue is scooped out like the
leaf of a pink peony, and the bridge of your nose is like the belly of a
Stradivarius--what a sounding-board! and inside your beautiful big chest
the lungs are made of leather! and your breath, it embalms--like the
breath of a beautiful white heifer fed on the buttercups, and daisies of
the Vaterland! and you have a quick, soft, susceptible heart, a heart of
gold, matemoiselle--all that sees itself in your face!

[Illustration: "'HIMMEL! THE ROOF OF YOUR MOUTH'"]

    "'Votre cœur est un luth suspendu!
      Aussitôt qu'on le touche, il résonne....'

What a pity you have not also the musical organization!"

"Oh, but I _have_, monsieur; you heard me sing 'Ben Bolt,' didn't you?
What makes you say that?"

Svengali was confused for a moment. Then he said: "When I play the
'Rosemonde' of Schubert, matemoiselle, you look another way and smoke a
cigarette.... You look at the big Taffy, at the Little Billee, at the
pictures on the walls, or out of window, at the sky, the chimney-pots of
Notre Dame de Paris; you do not look at Svengali!--Svengali, who looks
at you with all his eyes, and plays you the 'Rosemonde' of Schubert!"

"Oh, maïe, aïe!" exclaimed Trilby; "you _do_ use lovely language!"

"But never mind, matemoiselle; when your pain arrives, then shall you
come once more to Svengali, and he shall take it away from you, and keep
it himself for a soufenir of you when you are gone. And when you have it
no more, he shall play you the 'Rosemonde' of Schubert, all alone for
you; and then, 'Messieurs les étutiants, montez à la chaumière!' ...
because it is gayer! _And you shall see nothing, hear nothing, think of
nothing but Svengali, Svengali, Svengali!_"

Here he felt his peroration to be so happy and effective that he thought
it well to go at once and make a good exit. So he bent over Trilby's
shapely freckled hand and kissed it, and bowed himself out of the room,
without even borrowing his five-franc piece.

"He's a rum 'un, ain't he?" said Trilby. "He reminds me of a big hungry
spider, and makes me feel like a fly! But he's cured my pain! he's cured
my pain! Ah! you don't know what my pain is when it comes!"

"I wouldn't have much to do with him, all the same!" said the Laird.
"I'd sooner have any pain than have it cured in that unnatural way, and
by such a man as that! He's a bad fellow, Svengali--I'm sure of it! He
mesmerized you; that's what it is--mesmerism! I've often heard of it,
but never seen it done before. They get you into their power, and just
make you do any blessed thing they please--lie, murder, steal--anything!
and kill yourself into the bargain when they've done with you! It's just
too terrible to think of!"

So spake the Laird, earnestly, solemnly, surprised out of his usual
self, and most painfully impressed--and his own impressiveness grew upon
him and impressed him still more. He loomed quite prophetic.

Cold shivers went down Trilby's back as she listened. She had a
singularly impressionable nature, as was shown by her quick and ready
susceptibility to Svengali's hypnotic influence. And all that day, as
she posed for Durien (to whom she did not mention her adventure), she
was haunted by the memory of Svengali's big eyes and the touch of his
soft, dirty finger-tips on her face; and her fear and her repulsion grew
together.

And "Svengali, Svengali, Svengali!" went ringing in her head and ears
till it became an obsession, a dirge, a knell, an unendurable burden,
almost as hard to bear as the pain in her eyes.

"_Svengali, Svengali, Svengali!_"

At last she asked Durien if he knew him.

"Parbleu! Si je connais Svengali!"

"Quest-ce que t'en penses?"

"Quand il sera mort, ça fera une fameuse crapule de moins!"


"CHEZ CARREL."

Carrel's atelier (or painting-school) was in the Rue Notre Dame des
Potirons St. Michel, at the end of a large court-yard, where there were
many large dirty windows facing north, and each window let the light of
heaven into a large dirty studio.

The largest of these studios, and the dirtiest, was Carrel's, where some
thirty or forty art students drew and painted from the nude model every
day but Sunday from eight till twelve, and for two hours in the
afternoon, except on Saturdays, when the afternoon was devoted to
much-needed Augean sweepings and cleanings.

One week the model was male, the next female, and so on, alternating
throughout the year.

A stove, a model-throne, stools, boxes, some fifty strongly built low
chairs with backs, a couple of score easels and many drawing-boards,
completed the mobilier.

The bare walls were adorned with endless caricatures--_des charges_--in
charcoal and white chalk; and also the scrapings of many palettes--a
polychromous decoration not unpleasing.

[Illustration: "'ÇA FERA UNE FAMEUSE CRAPULE DE MOINS'"]

For the freedom of the studio and the use of the model each student paid
ten francs a month to the massier, or senior student, the responsible
bellwether of the flock; besides this, it was expected of you, on your
entrance or initiation, that you should pay for your footing--your
_bienvenue_--some thirty, forty, or fifty francs, to be spent on cakes
and rum punch all round.

Every Friday Monsieur Carrel, a great artist, and also a stately,
well-dressed, and most courteous gentleman (duly decorated with the red
rosette of the Legion of Honor), came for two or three hours and went
the round, spending a few minutes at each drawing-board or easel--ten
or even twelve when the pupil was an industrious and promising one.

He did this for love, not money, and deserved all the reverence with
which he inspired this somewhat irreverent and most unruly company,
which was made up of all sorts.

Graybeards who had been drawing and painting there for thirty years and
more, and remembered other masters than Carrel, and who could draw and
paint a torso almost as well as Titian or Velasquez--almost, but not
quite--and who could never do anything else, and were fixtures at
Carrel's for life.

Younger men who in a year or two, or three or five, or ten or twenty,
were bound to make their mark, and perhaps follow in the footsteps of
the master; others as conspicuously singled out for failure and future
mischance--for the hospital, the garret, the river, the Morgue, or,
worse, the traveller's bag, the road, or even the paternal counter.

Irresponsible boys, mere rapins, all laugh and chaff and
mischief--"blague et bagout Parisien"; little lords of misrule--wits,
butts, bullies; the idle and industrious apprentice, the good and the
bad, the clean and the dirty (especially the latter)--all more or less
animated by a certain _esprit de corps_, and working very happily and
genially together, on the whole, and always willing to help each other
with sincere artistic counsel if it were asked for seriously, though it
was not always couched in terms very flattering to one's self-love.

Before Little Billee became one of this band of brothers he had been
working for three or four years in a London art school, drawing and
painting from the life; he had also worked from the antique in the
British Museum--so that he was no novice.

As he made his début at Carrel's one Monday morning he felt somewhat shy
and ill at ease. He had studied French most earnestly at home in
England, and could read it pretty well, and even write it and speak it
after a fashion; but he spoke it with much difficulty, and found studio
French a different language altogether from the formal and polite
language he had been at such pains to learn. Ollendorff does not cater
for the quartier latin. Acting on Taffy's advice--for Taffy had worked
under Carrel--Little Billee handed sixty francs to the massier for his
_bienvenue_--a lordly sum--and this liberality made a most favorable
impression, and went far to destroy any little prejudice that might have
been caused by the daintiness of his dress, the cleanliness of his
person, and the politeness of his manners. A place was assigned to him,
and an easel and a board; for he elected to stand at his work and begin
with a chalk drawing. The model (a male) was posed, and work began in
silence. Monday morning is always rather sulky everywhere (except
perhaps in judee). During the ten minutes' rest three or four students
came and looked at Little Billee's beginnings, and saw at a glance that
he thoroughly well knew what he was about, and respected him for it.

Nature had given him a singularly light hand--or rather two, for he was
ambidextrous, and could use both with equal skill; and a few months'
practice at a London life school had quite cured him of that
purposeless indecision of touch which often characterizes the prentice
hand for years of apprenticeship, and remains with the amateur for life.
The lightest and most careless of his pencil strokes had a precision
that was inimitable, and a charm that specially belonged to him, and was
easy to recognize at a glance. His touch on either canvas or paper was
like Svengali's on the key-board--unique.

As the morning ripened little attempts at conversation were made--little
breakings of the ice of silence. It was Lambert, a youth with a
singularly facetious face, who first woke the stillness with the
following uncalled-for remarks in English very badly pronounced:

"Av you seen my fahzere's ole shoes?"

"I av not seen your fahzere's ole shoes."

Then, after a pause:

"Av you seen my fahzere's ole 'at?"

"I av not seen your fahzere's old 'at!"

Presently another said, "Je trouve qu'il a une jolie tête, l'Anglais."

But I will put it all into English:

"I find that he has a pretty head--the Englishman! What say _you_,
Barizel?"

"Yes; but why has he got eyes like brandy-balls, two a penny?"

"Because he's an Englishman!"

"Yes; but why has he got a mouth like a guinea-pig, with two big teeth
in front like the double blank at dominos?"

"Because he's an Englishman!"

[Illustration: "'AV YOU SEEN MY FAHZERE'S OLE SHOES?'"]

"Yes; but why has he got a back without any bend in it, as if he'd
swallowed the Colonne Vendôme as far up as the battle of Austerlitz?"

"Because he's an Englishman!"

And so on, till all the supposed characteristics of Little Billee's
outer man were exhausted. Then:

"Papelard!"

"What?"

"_I_ should like to know if the Englishman says his prayers before going
to bed."

"Ask him."

"Ask him yourself!"

"_I_ should like to know if the Englishman has sisters; and if so, how
old and how many and what sex."

"Ask him."

"Ask him yourself!"

"_I_ should like to know the detailed and circumstantial history of the
Englishman's first love, and how he lost his innocence!"

"Ask him," etc., etc., etc.

Little Billee, conscious that he was the object of conversation, grew
somewhat nervous. Soon he was addressed directly.

"Dites donc, l'Anglais?"

"Kwaw?" said Little Billee.

"Avez-vous une sœur?"

"Wee."

"Est-ce qu'elle vous ressemble?"

"Nong."

"C'est bien dommage! Est-ce qu'elle dit ses prières, le soir, en se
couchant?"

A fierce look came into Little Billee's eyes and a redness to his
cheeks, and this particular form of overture to friendship was
abandoned.

Presently Lambert said, "Si nous mettions l'Anglais à l'échelle?"

Little Billee, who had been warned, knew what this ordeal meant.

They tied you to a ladder, and carried you in procession up and down the
court-yard, and if you were nasty about it they put you under the pump.

During the next rest it was explained to him that he must submit to this
indignity, and the ladder (which was used for reaching the high shelves
round the studio) was got ready.

Little Billee smiled a singularly winning smile, and suffered himself to
be bound with such good-humor that they voted it wasn't amusing, and
unbound him, and he escaped the ordeal by ladder.

Taffy had also escaped, but in another way. When they tried to seize him
he took up the first _rapin_ that came to hand, and, using him as a kind
of club, he swung him about so freely and knocked down so many students
and easels and drawing-boards with him, and made such a terrific rumpus,
that the whole studio had to cry for "pax!" Then he performed feats of
strength of such a surprising kind that the memory of him remained in
Carrel's studio for years, and he became a legend, a tradition, a myth!
It is now said (in what still remains of the quartier latin) that he was
seven feet high, and used to juggle with the massier and model as with a
pair of billiard balls, using only his left hand!

To return to Little Billee. When it struck twelve, the cakes and rum
punch arrived--a very goodly sight that put every one in a good temper.

The cakes were of three kinds--Babas, Madeleines, and Savarins--three
sous apiece, fourpence half-penny the set of three. No nicer cakes are
made in France, and they are as good in the quartier latin as anywhere
else; no nicer cakes are made in the whole world, that I know of. You
must begin with the Madeleine, which is rich and rather heavy; then the
Baba; and finish up with the Savarin, which is shaped like a ring, very
light, and flavored with rum. And then you must really leave off.

The rum punch was tepid, very sweet, and not a bit too strong.

They dragged the model-throne into the middle, and a chair was put on
for Little Billee, who dispensed his hospitality in a very polite and
attractive manner, helping the massier first, and then the other
graybeards in the order of their grayness, and so on down to the model.

Presently, just as he was about to help himself, he was asked to sing
them an English song. After a little pressing he sang them a song about
a gay cavalier who went to serenade his mistress (and a ladder of ropes,
and a pair of masculine gloves that didn't belong to the gay cavalier,
but which he found in his lady's bower)--a poor sort of song, but it was
the nearest approach to a comic song he knew. There are four verses to
it, and each verse is rather long. It does not sound at all funny to a
French audience, and even with an English one Little Billee was not good
at comic songs.

[Illustration: TAFFY À L'ÉCHELLE!]

He was, however, much applauded at the end of each verse. When he had
finished, he was asked if he were _quite_ sure there wasn't any more of
it, and they expressed a deep regret; and then each student, straddling
on his little thick-set chair as on a horse, and clasping the back of it
in both hands, galloped round Little Billee's throne quite
seriously--the strangest procession he had ever seen. It made him laugh
till he cried, so that he couldn't eat or drink.

Then he served more punch and cake all round; and just as he was going
to begin himself, Papelard said:

"Say, you others, I find that the Englishman has something of truly
distinguished in the voice, something of sympathetic, of
touching--something of _je ne sais quoi_!"

Bouchardy: "Yes, yes--something of _je ne sais quoi_! That's the very
phrase--n'est-ce pas, vous autres, that is a good phrase that Papelard
has just invented to describe the voice of the Englishman. He is very
intelligent, Papelard."

Chorus: "Perfect, perfect; he has the genius of characterization,
Papelard. Dites donc, l'Anglais! once more that beautiful song--hein?
Nous vous en prions tous."

Little Billee willingly sang it again, with even greater applause, and
again they galloped, but the other way round and faster, so that Little
Billee became quite hysterical, and laughed till his sides ached.

Then Dubosc: "I find there is something of very capitous and exciting in
English music--of very stimulating. And you, Bouchardy?"

Bouchardy: "Oh, me! It is above all the _words_ that I admire; they have
something of passionate, of romantic--'ze-ese glâ-âves, zese
glâ-âves--zey do not belong to me.' I don't know what that means, but I
love that sort of--of--of--_je ne sais quoi_, in short! Just _once_
more, l'Anglais; only _once_, the _four_ couplets."

So he sang it a third time, all four verses, while they leisurely ate
and drank and smoked and looked at each other, nodding solemn
commendation of certain phrases in the song: "Très bien!" "Très bien!"
"Ah! voilà qui est bien réussi!" "Épatant, ça!" "Très fin!" etc., etc.
For, stimulated by success, and rising to the occasion, he did his very
utmost to surpass himself in emphasis of gesture and accent and
histrionic drollery--heedless of the fact that not one of his listeners
had the slightest notion what his song was about.

It was a sorry performance.

And it was not till he had sung it four times that he discovered the
whole thing was an elaborate impromptu farce, of which he was the butt,
and that of all his royal spread not a crumb or a drop was left for
himself.

It was the old fable of the fox and the crow! And to do him justice, he
laughed as heartily as any one, as if he thoroughly enjoyed the
joke--and when you take jokes in that way people soon leave off poking
fun at you. It is almost as good as being very big, like Taffy, and
having a choleric blue eye!

Such was Little Billee's first experience of Carrel's studio, where he
spent many happy mornings and made many good friends.

No more popular student had ever worked there within the memory of the
grayest graybeards; none more amiable, more genial, more cheerful,
self-respecting, considerate, and polite, and certainly none with
greater gifts for art.

Carrel would devote at least fifteen minutes to him, and invited him
often to his own private studio. And often, on the fourth and fifth day
of the week, a group of admiring students would be gathered by his easel
watching him as he worked.

"C'est un rude lapin, l'Anglais! au moins il sait son orthographe en
peinture, ce coco-là!"

Such was the verdict on Little Billee at Carrel's studio; and I can
conceive no loftier praise.

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

Young as she was (seventeen or eighteen, or thereabouts), and also
tender (like Little Billee), Trilby had singularly clear and quick
perceptions in all matters that concerned her tastes, fancies, or
affections, and thoroughly knew her own mind, and never lost much time
in making it up.

On the occasion of her first visit to the studio in the Place St.
Anatole des Arts, it took her just five minutes to decide that it was
quite the nicest, homeliest, genialest, jolliest studio in the whole
quartier latin, or out of it, and its three inhabitants, individually
and collectively, were more to her taste than any one else she had ever
met.

[Illustration: "THE FOX AND THE CROW"]

In the first place, they were English, and she loved to hear her
mother-tongue and speak it. It awoke all manner of tender recollections,
sweet reminiscences of her childhood, her parents, her old home--such a
home as it was--or, rather, such homes; for there had been many
flittings from one poor nest to another. The O'Ferralls had been as
birds on the bough.

She had loved her parents very dearly; and, indeed, with all their
faults, they had many endearing qualities--the qualities that so often
go with those particular faults--charm, geniality, kindness, warmth of
heart, the constant wish to please, the generosity that comes before
justice, and lends its last sixpence and forgets to pay its debts!

She knew other English and American artists, and had sat to them
frequently for the head and hands; but none of these, for general
agreeableness of aspect or manner, could compare in her mind with the
stalwart and magnificent Taffy, the jolly fat Laird of Cockpen, the
refined, sympathetic, and elegant Little Billee; and she resolved that
she would see as much of them as she could, that she would make herself
at home in that particular studio, and necessary to its "locataires";
and, without being the least bit vain or self-conscious, she had no
doubts whatever of her power to please--to make herself both useful and
ornamental if it suited her purpose to do so.

Her first step in this direction was to borrow Père Martin's basket and
lantern and pick (he had more than one set of these trade properties)
for the use of Taffy, whom she feared she might have offended by the
freedom of her comments on his picture.

Then, as often as she felt it to be discreet, she sounded her war-cry at
the studio door and went in and made kind inquiries, and, sitting
cross-legged on the model-throne, ate her bread and cheese and smoked
her cigarette and "passed the time of day," as she chose to call it;
telling them all such news of the quartier as had come within her own
immediate ken. She was always full of little stories of other studios,
which, to do her justice, were always good-natured, and probably
true--quite so, as far as she was concerned; she was the most literal
person alive; and she told all these "ragots, cancans, et potins
d'atelier" in a quaint and amusing manner. The slightest look of gravity
or boredom on one of those three faces, and she made herself scarce at
once.

She soon found opportunities for usefulness also. If a costume were
wanted, for instance, she knew where to borrow it, or hire it or buy it
cheaper than any one anywhere else. She procured stuffs for them at cost
price, as it seemed, and made them into draperies and female garments of
any kind that was wanted, and sat in them for the toreador's sweetheart
(she made the mantilla herself), for Taffy's starving dress-maker about
to throw herself into the Seine, for Little Billee's studies of the
beautiful French peasant girl in his picture, now so famous, called "The
Pitcher Goes to the Well."

Then she darned their socks and mended their clothes, and got all their
washing done properly and cheaply at her friend Madame Boisse's, in the
Rue des Cloîtres Ste. Pétronille.

And then again, when they were hard up and wanted a good round sum of
money for some little pleasure excursion, such as a trip to
Fontainebleau or Barbizon for two or three days, it was she who took
their watches and scarf-pins and things to the Mount of Piety in the
Street of the Well of Love (where dwelt "ma tante," which is French for
"my uncle" in this connection), in order to raise the necessary funds.

[Illustration: THE LATIN QUARTER]

She was, of course, most liberally paid for all these little services,
rendered with such pleasure and good-will--far too liberally, she
thought. She would have been really happier doing them for love.

Thus in a very short time she became a _persona gratissima_--a sunny and
ever welcome vision of health and grace and liveliness and unalterable
good-humor, always ready to take any trouble to please her beloved
"Angliches," as they were called by Madame Vinard, the handsome
shrill-voiced _concierge_, who was almost jealous; for she was devoted
to the Angliches too--and so was Monsieur Vinard--and so were the little
Vinards.

She knew when to talk and when to laugh and when to hold her tongue; and
the sight of her sitting cross-legged on the model-throne darning the
Laird's socks or sewing buttons on his shirts or repairing the
smoke-holes in his trousers was so pleasant that it was painted by all
three. One of these sketches (in water-color, by Little Billee) sold the
other day at Christie's for a sum so large that I hardly dare to mention
it. It was done in an afternoon.

Sometimes on a rainy day, when it was decided they should dine at home,
she would fetch the food and cook it, and lay the cloth, and even make
the salad. She was a better saladist than Taffy, a better cook than the
Laird, a better caterer than Little Billee. And she would be invited to
take her share in the banquet. And on these occasions her tremulous
happiness was so immense that it would be quite pathetic to see--almost
painful; and their three British hearts were touched by thoughts of all
the loneliness and homelessness, the expatriation, the half-conscious
loss of caste, that all this eager childish clinging revealed.

And that is why (no doubt) that with all this familiar intimacy there
was never any hint of gallantry or flirtation in any shape or form
whatever--bonne camaraderie, voilà tout. Had she been Little Billee's
sister she could not have been treated with more real respect. And her
deep gratitude for this unwonted compliment transcended any passion she
had ever felt. As the good Lafontaine so prettily says,

    "Ces animaux vivaient entre eux comme cousins;
     Cette union si douce, et presque fraternelle,
     Edifiait tous les voisins!"

And then their talk! It was to her as the talk of the gods in Olympus,
save that it was easier to understand, and she could always understand
it. For she was a very intelligent person, in spite of her wofully
neglected education, and most ambitious to learn--a new ambition for
her.

So they lent her books--English books: Dickens, Thackeray, Walter
Scott--which she devoured in the silence of the night, the solitude of
her little attic in the Rue des Pousse-Cailloux, and new worlds were
revealed to her. She grew more English every day; and that was a good
thing.

Trilby speaking English and Trilby speaking French were two different
beings. Trilby's English was more or less that of her father, a
highly-educated man; her mother, who was a Scotch woman, although an
uneducated one, had none of the ungainliness that mars the speech of so
many English women in that humble rank--no droppings of the h, no
broadening of the o's and a's.

[Illustration: CUISINE BOURGEOISE EN BOHÈME]

Trilby's French was that of the quartier latin--droll, slangy, piquant,
quaint, picturesque--quite the reverse of ungainly, but in which there
was scarcely a turn of phrase that would not stamp the speaker as
being hopelessly, emphatically "no lady!" Though it was funny without
being vulgar, it was perhaps a little _too_ funny!

And she handled her knife and fork in the dainty English way, as no
doubt her father had done--and his; and, indeed, when alone with them
she was so absolutely "like a lady" that it seemed quite odd (though
very seductive) to see her in a grisette's cap and dress and apron. So
much for her English training.

But enter a Frenchman or two, and a transformation effected itself
immediately--a new incarnation of Trilbyness--so droll and amusing that
it was difficult to decide which of her two incarnations was the most
attractive.

It must be admitted that she had her faults--like Little Billee.

For instance, she would be miserably jealous of any other woman who came
to the studio, to sit or scrub or sweep or do anything else, even of the
dirty tipsy old hag who sat for Taffy's "found drowned"--"as if she
couldn't have sat for it herself!"

And then she would be cross and sulky, but not for long--an injured
martyr, soon ready to forgive and be forgiven.

She would give up any sitting to come and sit to her three English
friends. Even Durien had serious cause for complaint.

Then her affection was exacting: she always wanted to be told one was
fond of her, and she dearly loved her own way, even in the sewing on of
buttons and the darning of socks, which was innocent enough. But when
it came to the cutting and fashioning of garments for a toreador's
bride, it was a nuisance not to be borne!

"What could _she_ know of toreadors' brides and their wedding-dresses?"
the Laird would indignantly ask--as if he were a toreador himself; and
this was the aggravating side of her irrepressible Trilbyness.

In the caressing, demonstrative tenderness of her friendship she "made
the soft eyes" at all three indiscriminately. But sometimes Little
Billee would look up from his work as she was sitting to Taffy or the
Laird, and find her gray eyes fixed on him with an all-enfolding gaze,
so piercingly, penetratingly, unutterably sweet and kind and tender,
such a brooding, dovelike look of soft and warm solicitude, that he
would feel a flutter at his heart, and his hand would shake so that he
could not paint; and in a waking dream he would remember that his mother
had often looked at him like that when he was a small boy, and she a
beautiful young woman untouched by care or sorrow; and the tear that
always lay in readiness so close to the corner of Little Billee's eye
would find it very difficult to keep itself in its proper place--unshed.

And at such moments the thought that Trilby sat for the figure would go
through him like a knife.

She did not sit promiscuously to anybody who asked, it is true. But she
still sat to Durien; to the great Gérôme; to M. Carrel, who scarcely
used any other model.

It was poor Trilby's sad distinction that she surpassed all other models
as Calypso surpassed her nymphs; and whether by long habit, or through
some obtuseness in her nature, or lack of imagination, she was equally
unconscious of self with her clothes on or without! Truly, she could be
naked and unashamed--in this respect an absolute savage.

[Illustration: "THE SOFT EYES"]

She would have ridden through Coventry, like Lady Godiva--but without
giving it a thought beyond wondering why the streets were empty and the
shops closed and the blinds pulled down--would even have looked up to
Peeping Tom's shutter with a friendly nod, had she known he was behind
it!

In fact, she was absolutely without that kind of shame, as she was
without any kind of fear. But she was destined soon to know both fear
and shame.

And here it would not be amiss for me to state a fact well known to all
painters and sculptors who have used the nude model (except a few senile
pretenders, whose purity, not being of the right sort, has gone rank
from too much watching), namely, that nothing is so chaste as nudity.
Venus herself, as she drops her garments and steps on to the
model-throne, leaves behind her on the floor every weapon in her armory
by which she can pierce to the grosser passions of man. The more perfect
her unveiled beauty, the more keenly it appeals to his higher instincts.
And where her beauty fails (as it almost always does somewhere in the
Venuses who sit for hire), the failure is so lamentably conspicuous in
the studio light--the fierce light that beats on this particular
throne--that Don Juan himself, who has not got to paint, were fain to
hide his eyes in sorrow and disenchantment, and fly to other climes.

All beauty is sexless in the eyes of the artist at his work--the beauty
of man, the beauty of woman, the heavenly beauty of the child, which is
the sweetest and best of all.

Indeed it is woman, lovely woman, whose beauty falls the shortest, for
sheer lack of proper physical training.

As for Trilby, G----, to whom she sat for his Phryne, once told me that
the sight of her thus was a thing to melt Sir Galahad, and sober
Silenus, and chasten Jove himself--a thing to Quixotize a modern French
masher! I can well believe him. For myself, I only speak of Trilby as I
have seen her--clothed and in her right mind. She never sat to me for
any Phryne, never bared herself to me, nor did I ever dream of asking
her. I would as soon have asked the Queen of Spain to let me paint her
legs! But I have worked from many female models in many countries, some
of them the best of their kind. I have also, like Svengali, seen Taffy
"trying to get himself clean," either at home or in the swimming-baths
of the Seine; and never a sitting woman among them all who could match
for grace or finish or splendor of outward form that mighty Yorkshireman
sitting in his tub, or sunning himself, like Ilyssus, at the Bains Henri
Quatre, or taking his running header _à la hussarde_, off the
spring-board at the Bains Deligny, with a group of wondering Frenchmen
gathered round.

Up he shot himself into mid-air with a sounding double downward kick,
parabolically; then, turning a splendid semi-demi-summersault against
the sky, down he came headlong, his body straight and stiff as an arrow,
and made his clean hole in the water without splash or sound, to
reappear a hundred yards farther on!

"Sac à papier! quel gaillard que cet Anglais, hein?"

"A-t-on jamais vu un torse pareil!"

"Et les bras, donc!"

"Et les jambes, nom d'un tonnerre!"

"Mâtin! J'aimerais mieux être en colère contre lui qu'il ne soit en
colère contre moi!" etc., etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Omne ignotum pro magnifico!

If our climate were such that we could go about without any clothes on,
we probably should; in which case, although we should still murder and
lie and steal and bear false witness against our neighbor, and break the
Sabbath day and take the Lord's name in vain, much deplorable wickedness
of another kind would cease to exist for sheer lack of mystery; and
Christianity would be relieved of its hardest task in this sinful world,
and Venus Aphrodite (_alias_ Aselgeia) would have to go a-begging along
with the tailors and dress-makers and boot-makers, and perhaps our
bodies and limbs would be as those of the Theseus and Venus of Milo; who
was no Venus, except in good looks!

[Illustration: ILYSSUS]

At all events, there would be no cunning, cruel deceptions, no artful
taking in of artless inexperience, no unduly hurried waking-up from
Love's young dream, no handing down to posterity of hidden uglinesses
and weaknesses, and worse!

And also many a flower, now born to blush unseen, would be reclaimed
from its desert, and suffered to hold its own, and flaunt away with the
best in the inner garden of roses!

And here let me humbly apologize to the casual reader for the length and
possible irrelevancy of this digression, and for its subject. To those
who may find matter for sincere disapprobation or even grave offence in
a thing that has always seemed to me so simple, so commonplace, as to be
hardly worth talking or writing about, I can only plead a sincerity
equal to theirs, and as deep a love and reverence for the gracious,
goodly shape that God is said to have made after His own image for
inscrutable purposes of His own.

Nor, indeed, am I pleading for such a subversive and revolutionary
measure as the wholesale abolition of clothes, being the chilliest of
mortals, and quite unlike Mr. Theseus or Mr. Ilyssus either.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes Trilby would bring her little brother to the studio in the
Place St. Anatole des Arts, in his "beaux habits de Pâques," his hair
well curled and pomatumed, his hands and face well washed.

He was a very engaging little mortal. The Laird would fill his pockets
full of Scotch goodies, and paint him as a little Spaniard in "Le Fils
du Toreador," a sweet little Spaniard with blue eyes, and curly locks
as light as tow, and a complexion of milk and roses, in singular and
piquant contrast to his swarthy progenitor.

Taffy would use him as an Indian club or a dumb-bell, to the child's
infinite delight, and swing him on the trapeze, and teach him "la boxe."

And the sweetness and fun of his shrill, happy, infantile laughter
(which was like an echo of Trilby's, only an octave higher) so moved and
touched and tickled one that Taffy had to look quite fierce, so he might
hide the strange delight of tenderness that somehow filled his manly
bosom at the mere sound of it (lest Little Billee and the Laird should
think him goody-goody); and the fiercer Taffy looked, the less this
small mite was afraid of him.

Little Billee made a beautiful water-color sketch of him, just as he
was, and gave it to Trilby, who gave it to le père Martin, who gave it
to his wife with strict injunctions not to sell it as an old master.
Alas! it _is_ an old master now, and Heaven only knows who has got it!

Those were happy days for Trilby's little brother, happy days for
Trilby, who was immensely fond of him, and very proud. And the happiest
day of all was when Trois Angliches took Trilby and Jeannot (for so the
mite was called) to spend the Sunday in the woods at Meudon, and
breakfast and dine at the garde champêtre's. Swings, peep-shows,
donkey-rides; shooting at a mark with cross-bows and little pellets of
clay, and smashing little plaster figures and winning macaroons; losing
one's self in the beautiful forest; catching newts and tadpoles and
young frogs; making music on mirlitons. Trilby singing "Ben Bolt" into a
mirliton was a thing to be remembered, whether one would or no!

Trilby on this occasion came out in a new character, _en demoiselle_,
with a little black bonnet, and a gray jacket of her own making.

To look at (but for her loose, square-toed, heelless silk boots laced up
the inner side), she might have been the daughter of an English
dean--until she undertook to teach the Laird some favorite cancan steps.
And then the Laird himself, it must be admitted, no longer looked like
the son of a worthy, God-fearing, Sabbath-keeping Scotch solicitor.

This was after dinner, in the garden, at "la loge du garde champêtre."
Taffy and Jeannot and Little Billee made the necessary music on their
mirlitons, and the dancing soon became general, with plenty also to look
on, for the garde had many customers who dined there on summer Sundays.

It is no exaggeration to say that Trilby was far and away the belle of
that particular ball, and there have been worse balls in much finer
company, and far plainer women!

Trilby lightly dancing the cancan (there are cancans and cancans) was a
singularly gainly and seductive person--_et vera incessu patuit dea_!
Here, again, she was funny without being vulgar. And for mere grace
(even in the cancan), she was the forerunner of Miss Kate Vaughan; and,
for sheer fun, the precursor of Miss Nelly Farren!

And the Laird, trying to dance after her ("dongsong le konkong," as he
called it), was too funny for words; and if genuine popular success is a
true test of humor, no greater humorist ever danced a _pas seul_.

[Illustration: "'VOILÀ L'ESPAYCE DE HOM KER JER SWEE!'"]

What Englishmen could do in France during the fifties, and yet manage to
preserve their self-respect, and even the respect of their respectable
French friends!

"Voilà l'espayce de hom ker jer swee!" said the Laird, every time he
bowed in acknowledgment of the applause that greeted his performance of
various solo steps of his own--Scotch reels and sword-dances that come
in admirably....

Then, one fine day, the Laird fell ill, and the doctor had to be sent
for, and he ordered a nurse. But Trilby would hear of no nurses, not
even a Sister of Charity! She did all the nursing herself, and never
slept a wink for three successive days and nights.

On the third day the Laird was out of all danger, the delirium was past,
and the doctor found poor Trilby fast asleep by the bedside.

Madame Vinard, at the bedroom door, put her finger to her lips, and
whispered: "Quel bonheur! il est sauvé, M. le Docteur; écoutez! il dit
ses prières en Anglais, ce brave garçon!"

The good old doctor, who didn't understand a word of English, listened,
and heard the Laird's voice, weak and low, but quite clear, and full of
heart-felt fervor, intoning, solemnly:

    "'Green herbs, red peppers, mussels, saffron,
          Soles, onions, garlic, roach, and dace--
      All these you eat at Terré's Tavern
          In that one dish of bouillabaisse!'"

"Ah! mais c'est très bien de sa part, ce brave jeune homme! rendre
grâces au ciel comme cela, quand le danger est passé! très bien, très
bien!"

Sceptic and Voltairian as he was, and not the friend of prayer, the good
doctor was touched, for he was old, and therefore kind and tolerant, and
made allowances.

And afterwards he said such sweet things to Trilby about it all, and
about her admirable care of his patient, that she positively wept with
delight--like sweet Alice with hair so brown, whenever Ben Bolt gave her
a smile.

All this sounds very goody-goody, but it's true.

So it will be easily understood how the trois Angliches came in time to
feel for Trilby quite a peculiar regard, and looked forward with
sorrowful forebodings to the day when this singular and pleasant little
quartet would have to be broken up, each of them to spread his wings and
fly away on his own account, and poor Trilby to be left behind all by
herself. They would even frame little plans whereby she might better
herself in life, and avoid the many snares and pitfalls that would beset
her lonely path in the quartier latin when they were gone.

Trilby never thought of such things as these; she took short views of
life, and troubled herself about no morrows.

There was, however, one jarring figure in her little fool's paradise, a
baleful and most ominous figure that constantly crossed her path, and
came between her and the sun, and threw its shadow over her, and that
was Svengali.

He also was a frequent visitor at the studio in the Place St. Anatole,
where much was forgiven him for the sake of his music, especially when
he came with Gecko and they made music together. But it soon became
apparent that they did not come there to play to the three Angliches: it
was to see Trilby, whom they both had taken it into their heads to
adore, each in a different fashion:

Gecko, with a humble, doglike worship that expressed itself in mute,
pathetic deference and looks of lowly self-depreciation, of apology for
his own unworthy existence, as though the only requital he would ever
dare to dream of were a word of decent politeness, a glance of tolerance
or good-will--a mere bone to a dog.

Svengali was a bolder wooer. When he cringed, it was with a mock
humility full of sardonic threats; when he was playful, it was with a
terrible playfulness, like that of a cat with a mouse--a weird ungainly
cat, and most unclean; a sticky, haunting, long, lean, uncanny, black
spider-cat, if there is such an animal outside a bad dream.

It was a great grievance to him that she had suffered from no more pains
in her eyes. She had; but preferred to endure them rather than seek
relief from him.

So he would playfully try to mesmerize her with his glance, and sidle up
nearer and nearer to her, making passes and counter-passes, with stern
command in his eyes, till she would shake and shiver and almost sicken
with fear, and all but feel the spell come over her, as in a nightmare,
and rouse herself with a great effort and escape.

If Taffy were there he would interfere with a friendly "Now then, old
fellow, none of that!" and a jolly slap on the back, which would make
Svengali cough for an hour, and paralyze his mesmeric powers for a week.

Svengali had a stroke of good-fortune. He played at three grand
concerts with Gecko, and had a well-deserved success. He even gave a
concert of his own, which made a furor, and blossomed out into beautiful
and costly clothes of quite original color and shape and pattern, so
that people would turn round and stare at him in the street--a thing he
loved. He felt his fortune was secure, and ran into debt with tailors,
hatters, shoemakers, jewellers, but paid none of his old debts to his
friends. His pockets were always full of printed slips--things that had
been written about him in the papers--and he would read them aloud to
everybody he knew, especially to Trilby, as she sat darning socks on the
model-throne while the fencing and boxing were in train. And he would
lay his fame and his fortune at her feet, on condition that she should
share her life with him.

"Ach, himmel, Drilpy!" he would say, "you don't know what it is to be a
great pianist like me--hein! What is your Little Billee, with his
stinking oil-bladders, sitting mum in his corner, his mahlstick and his
palette in one hand, and his twiddling little footle pig's-hair brush in
the other! What noise does _he_ make? When his little fool of a picture
is finished he will send it to London, and they will hang it on a wall
with a lot of others, all in a line, like recruits called out for
inspection, and the yawning public will walk by in procession and
inspect, and say 'damn!' Svengali will go to London _himself_. Ha! ha!
He will be all alone on a platform, and play as nobody else can play;
and hundreds of beautiful Engländerinnen will see and hear and go mad
with love for him--Prinzessen, Comtessen, Serene English Altessen. They
will soon lose their Serenity and their Highness when they hear
Svengali! They will invite him to their palaces, and pay him a thousand
francs to play for them; and after, he will loll in the best arm-chair,
and they will sit all round him on footstools, and bring him tea and gin
and küchen and marrons glacés, and lean over him and fan him--for he is
tired after playing them for a thousand francs of Chopin! Ha, ha! I know
all about it--hein?

"And he will not look at them, even! He will look inward, at his own
dream--and his dream will be about Drilpy--to lay his talent, his glory,
his thousand francs at her beautiful white feet!

"Their stupid, big, fat, tow-headed, putty-nosed husbands will be mad
with jealousy, and long to box him, but they will be afraid. Ach! those
beautiful Anglaises! they will think it an honor to mend his shirts, to
sew buttons on his pantaloons; to darn his socks, as you are doing now
for that sacred imbecile of a Scotchman who is always trying to paint
toreadors, or that sweating, pig-headed bullock of an Englander who is
always trying to get himself dirty and then to get himself clean
again!--_e da capo!_

"Himmel! what big socks are those! what potato-sacks!

"Look at your Taffy! what is he good for but to bang great musicians on
the back with his big bear's paw! He finds that droll, the bullock!...

[Illustration: TIT FOR TAT]

"Look at your Frenchmen there--your damned conceited verfluchte pig-dogs
of Frenchmen--Durien, Barizel, Bouchardy! What can a Frenchman talk of,
hein? Only himself, and run down everybody else! His vanity makes me
sick! He always thinks the world is talking about _him_, the fool! He
forgets that there's a fellow called _Svengali_ for the world to talk
about! I tell you, Drilpy, it is about _me_ the world is talking--me and
nobody else--me, me, me!

"Listen what they say in the _Figaro_" (reads it).

"What do you think of that, hein? What would your Durien say if people
wrote of _him_ like that?

"But you are not listening, sapperment! great big she-fool that you
are--sheep's-head! Dummkopf! Donnerwetter! you are looking at the
chimney-pots when Svengali is talking! Look a little lower down between
the houses, on the other side of the river! There is a little ugly gray
building there, and inside are eight slanting slabs of brass, all of a
row, like beds in a school dormitory, and one fine day you shall lie
asleep on one of those slabs--you, Drilpy, who would not listen to
Svengali, and therefore lost him!... And over the middle of you will be
a little leather apron, and over your head a little brass tap, and all
day long and all night the cold water shall trickle, trickle, trickle
all the way down your beautiful white body to your beautiful white feet
till they turn green, and your poor, damp, draggled, muddy rags will
hang above you from the ceiling for your friends to know you by; drip,
drip, drip! But you will have no friends....

"And people of all sorts, strangers, will stare at you through the big
plate-glass windows--Englanders, chiffonniers, painters and sculptors,
workmen, pioupious, old hags of washer-women--and say, 'Ah! what a
beautiful woman was that! Look at her! She ought to be rolling in her
carriage and pair!' And just then who should come by, rolling in his
carriage and pair, smothered in furs, and smoking a big cigar of the
Havana, but Svengali, who will jump out, and push the canaille aside,
and say, 'Ha! ha! that is la grande Drilpy, who would not listen to
Svengali, but looked at the chimney-pots when he told her of his manly
love, and--'"

"Hi! damn it, Svengali, what the devil are you talking to Trilby about?
You're making her sick; can't you see? Leave off, and go to the piano,
man, or I'll come and slap you on the back again!"

Thus would that sweating, pig-headed bullock of an Englander stop
Svengali's love-making and release Trilby from bad quarters of an hour.

Then Svengali, who had a wholesome dread of the pig-headed bullock,
would go to the piano and make impossible discords, and say: "Dear
Drilpy, come and sing 'Pen Polt'! I am thirsting for those so beautiful
chest notes! Come!"

Poor Trilby needed little pressing when she was asked to sing, and would
go through her lamentable performance, to the great discomfort of Little
Billee. It lost nothing of its grotesqueness from Svengali's
accompaniment, which was a triumph of cacophony, and he would encourage
her--"Très pien, très pien, ça y est!"

When it was over, Svengali would test her ear, as he called it, and
strike the C in the middle and then the F just above, and ask which was
the highest; and she would declare they were both exactly the same. It
was only when he struck a note in the bass and another in the treble
that she could perceive any difference, and said that the first sounded
like père Martin blowing up his wife, and the second like her little
godson trying to make the peace between them.

She was quite tone-deaf, and didn't know it; and he would pay her
extravagant compliments on her musical talent, till Taffy would say:
"Look here, Svengali, let's hear _you_ sing a song!"

And he would tickle him so masterfully under the ribs that the creature
howled and became quite hysterical.

Then Svengali would vent his love of teasing on Little Billee, and pin
_his_ arms behind his back and swing him round, saying: "Himmel! what's
this for an arm? It's like a girl's!"

"It's strong enough to paint!" said Little Billee.

"And what's this for a leg? It's like a mahlstick!"

"It's strong enough to kick, if you don't leave off!"

And Little Billee, the young and tender, would let out his little heel
and kick the German's shins; and just as the German was going to
retaliate, big Taffy would pin _his_ arms and make him sing another
song, more discordant than Trilby's--for he didn't dream of kicking
Taffy; of that you may be sure!

Such was Svengali--only to be endured for the sake of his music--always
ready to vex, frighten, bully, or torment anybody or anything smaller
and weaker than himself--from a woman or a child to a mouse or a fly.




Part Third

    "Par deçà, ne dela la mer
         Ne sçay dame ni damoiselle
         Qui soit en tous biens parfaits telle--
     C'est un songe que d'y penser:
     Dieu! qu'il fait bon la regarder!"


One lovely Monday morning in late September, at about eleven or so,
Taffy and the Laird sat in the studio--each opposite his picture,
smoking, nursing his knee, and saying nothing. The heaviness of Monday
weighed on their spirits more than usual, for the three friends had
returned late on the previous night from a week spent at Barbizon and in
the forest of Fontainebleau--a heavenly week among the painters:
Rousseau, Millet, Corot, Daubigny, let us suppose, and others less known
to fame this day. Little Billee, especially, had been fascinated by all
this artistic life in blouses and sabots and immense straw hats and
panamas, and had sworn to himself and to his friends that he would some
day live and die there--painting, the forest as it is, and peopling it
with beautiful people out of his own fancy--leading a healthy out-door
life of simple wants and lofty aspirations.

At length Taffy said: "Bother work this morning! I feel much more like a
stroll in the Luxembourg Gardens and lunch at the Café de l'Odéon, where
the omelets are good and the wine isn't blue."

"The very thing I was thinking of myself," said the Laird.

[Illustration: THE HAPPY LIFE]

So Taffy slipped on his old shooting-jacket and his old Harrow cricket
cap, with the peak turned the wrong way, and the Laird put on an old
great-coat of Taffy's that reached to his heels, and a battered straw
hat they had found in the studio when they took it; and both sallied
forth into the mellow sunshine on the way to Carrel's. For they meant to
seduce Little Billee from his work, that he might share in their
laziness, greediness, and general demoralization.

And whom should they meet coming down the narrow turreted old Rue
Vieille des Mauvais Ladres but Little Billee himself, with an air of
general demoralization so tragic that they were quite alarmed. He had
his paint-box and field-easel in one hand and his little valise in the
other. He was pale, his hat on the back of his head, his hair staring
all at sixes and sevens, like a sick Scotch terrier's.

"Good Lord! what's the matter?" said Taffy.

"Oh! oh! oh! she's sitting at Carrel's!"

"Who's sitting at Carrel's?"

"Trilby! sitting to all those ruffians! There she was, just as I opened
the door; I saw her, I tell you! The sight of her was like a blow
between the eyes, and I bolted! I shall never go back to that beastly
hole again! I'm off to Barbizon, to paint the forest; I was coming round
to tell you. Good-bye!..."

"Stop a minute--are you mad?" said Taffy, collaring him.

"Let me go, Taffy--let me go, damn it! I'll come back in a week--but I'm
going now! Let me go; do you hear?"

"But look here--I'll go with you."

"No; I want to be alone--quite alone. Let me go, I tell you!"

"I sha'n't let you go unless you swear to me, on your honor, that you'll
write directly, you get there, and every day till you come back. Swear!"

"All right; I swear--honor bright! Now there! Good-bye--good-bye; back
on Sunday--good-bye!" And he was off.

"Now, what the devil does all that mean?" asked Taffy, much perturbed.

"I suppose he's shocked at seeing Trilby in that guise, or disguise, or
unguise, sitting at Carrel's--he's such an odd little chap. And I must
say, I'm surprised at Trilby. It's a bad thing for her when we're away.
What could have induced her? She never sat in a studio of that kind
before. I thought she only sat to Durien and old Carrel."

They walked for a while in silence.

"Do you know, I've got a horrid idea that the little fool's in love with
her!"

"I've long had a horrid idea that _she's_ in love with _him_."

"That would be a very stupid business," said Taffy.

They walked on, brooding over those two horrid ideas, and the more they
brooded, considered, and remembered, the more convinced they became that
both were right.

"Here's a pretty kettle of fish!" said the Laird--"and talking of fish,
let's go and lunch."

And so demoralized were they that Taffy ate three omelets without
thinking, and the Laird drank two half-bottles of wine, and Taffy three,
and they walked about the whole of that afternoon for fear Trilby should
come to the studio--and were very unhappy.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is how Trilby came to sit at Carrel's studio:

Carrel had suddenly taken it into his head that he would spend a week
there, and paint a figure among his pupils, that they might see and
paint with--and if possible like--him. And he had asked Trilby as a
great favor to be the model, and Trilby was so devoted to the great
Carrel that she readily consented. So that Monday morning found her
there, and Carrel posed her as Ingres's famous figure in his picture
called "La Source," holding a stone pitcher on her shoulder.

[Illustration: "'LET ME GO, TAFFY ...'"]

And the work began in religious silence. Then in five minutes or so
Little Billee came bursting in, and as soon as he caught sight of her he
stopped and stood as one petrified, his shoulders up, his eyes staring.
Then lifting his arms, he turned and fled.

"Qu'est ce qu'il a donc, ce Litrebili?" exclaimed one or two students
(for they had turned his English nickname into French).

"Perhaps he's forgotten something," said another. "Perhaps he's
forgotten to brush his teeth and part his hair!"

"Perhaps he's forgotten to say his prayers!" said Barizel.

"He'll come back, I hope!" exclaimed the master.

And the incident gave rise to no further comment.

But Trilby was much disquieted, and fell to wondering what on earth was
the matter.

At first she wondered in French: French of the quartier latin. She had
not seen Little Billee for a week, and wondered if he were ill. She had
looked forward so much to his painting her--painting her
beautifully--and hoped he would soon come back, and lose no time.

Then she began to wonder in English--nice clean English of the studio in
the Place St. Anatole des Arts--her father's English--and suddenly a
quick thought pierced her through and through, and made the flesh tingle
on her insteps and the backs of her hands, and bathed her brow and
temples with sweat.

She had good eyes, and Little Billee had a singularly expressive face.

Could it possibly be that he was _shocked_ at seeing her sitting there?

She knew that he was peculiar in many ways. She remembered that neither
he nor Taffy nor the Laird had ever asked her to sit for the figure,
though she would have been only too delighted to do so for them. She
also remembered how Little Billee had always been silent whenever she
alluded to her posing for the "altogether," as she called it, and had
sometimes looked pained and always very grave.

She turned alternately pale and red, pale and red all over, again and
again, as the thought grew up in her--and soon the growing thought
became a torment.

[Illustration: "'QU'EST CE QU'IL A DONC, CE LITREBILI?'"]

This new-born feeling of shame was unendurable--its birth a travail that
racked and rent every fibre of her moral being, and she suffered agonies
beyond anything she had ever felt in her life.

"What is the matter with you, my child? Are you ill?" asked Carrel,
who, like every one else, was very fond of her, and to whom she had sat
as a child ("l'Enfance de Psyché," now in the Luxembourg Gallery, was
painted from her).

She shook her head, and the work went on.

Presently she dropped her pitcher, that broke into bits; and putting her
two hands to her face she burst into tears and sobs--and there, to the
amazement of everybody, she stood crying like a big baby--"La source aux
larmes?"

"What _is_ the matter, my poor dear child?" said Carrel, jumping up and
helping her off the throne.

"Oh, I don't know--I don't know--I'm ill--very ill--let me go home!"

And with kind solicitude and despatch they helped her on with her
clothes, and Carrel sent for a cab and took her home.

And on the way she dropped her head on his shoulder, and wept, and told
him all about it as well as she could, and Monsieur Carrel had tears in
his eyes too, and wished to Heaven he had never induced her to sit for
the figure, either then or at any other time. And pondering deeply and
sorrowfully on such terrible responsibility (he had grown-up daughters
of his own), he went back to the studio; and in an hour's time they got
another model and another pitcher, and went to work again.

       *       *       *       *       *

And Trilby, as she lay disconsolate on her bed all that day and all the
next, and all the next again, thought of her past life with agonies of
shame and remorse that made the pain in her eyes seem as a light and
welcome relief. For it came, and tortured worse and lasted longer than
it had ever done before. But she soon found, to her miserable
bewilderment, that mind-aches are the worst of all.

Then she decided that she must write to one of the trois Angliches, and
chose the Laird.

She was more familiar with him than with the other two: it was
impossible not to be familiar with the Laird if he liked one, as he was
so easy-going and demonstrative, for all that he was such a canny Scot!
Then she had nursed him through his illness; she had often hugged and
kissed him before the whole studio full of people--and even when alone
with him it had always seemed quite natural for her to do so. It was
like a child caressing a favorite young uncle or elder brother. And
though the good Laird was the least susceptible of mortals, he would
often find these innocent blandishments a somewhat trying ordeal! She
had never taken such a liberty with Taffy; and as for Little Billee, she
would sooner have died!

So she wrote to the Laird. I give her letter without the spelling, which
was often faulty, although her nightly readings had much improved it:

     "MY DEAR FRIEND,--I am very unhappy. I was sitting at Carrel's, in
     the Rue des Potirons, and Little Billee came in, and was so shocked
     and disgusted that he ran away and never came back.

     "I saw it all in his face.

     "I sat there because M. Carrel asked me to. He has always been very
     kind to me--M. Carrel--ever since I was a child; and I would do
     anything to please him, but never _that_ again.

     "He was there too.

     "I never thought anything about sitting before. I sat first as a
     child to M. Carrel. Mamma made me, and made me promise not to tell
     papa, and so I didn't. It soon seemed as natural to sit for people
     as to run errands for them, or wash and mend their clothes. Papa
     wouldn't have liked my doing that either, though we wanted the
     money badly. And so he never knew.

     "I have sat for the altogether to several other people besides--M.
     Gérôme, Durien, the two Hennequins, and Émile Baratier; and for the
     head and hands to lots of people, and for the feet only to Charles
     Faure, André Besson, Mathieu Dumoulin, and Collinet. Nobody else.

     "It seemed as natural for me to sit as for a man. Now I see the
     awful difference.

     "And I have done dreadful things besides, as you must know--as all
     the quartier knows. Baratier and Besson; but not Durien, though
     people think so. Nobody else, I swear--except old Monsieur Penque
     at the beginning, who was mamma's friend.

     "It makes me almost die of shame and misery to think of it; for
     that's not like sitting. I knew how wrong it was all along--and
     there's no excuse for me, none. Though lots of people do as bad,
     and nobody in the quartier seems to think any the worse of them.

     "If you and Taffy and Little Billee cut me, I really think I shall
     go mad and die. Without your friendship I shouldn't care to live a
     bit. Dear Sandy, I love your little finger better than any man or
     woman I ever met; and Taffy's and Little Billee's little fingers
     too.

[Illustration: REPENTANCE]

     "What shall I do? I daren't go out for fear of meeting one of you.
     Will you come and see me?

     "I am never going to sit again, not even for the face and hands. I
     am going back to be a _blanchisseuse de fin_ with my old friend
     Angèle Boisse, who is getting on very well indeed, in the Rue des
     Cloîtres Ste. Pétronille.

     "You _will_ come and see me, won't you? I shall be in all day till
     you do. Or else I will meet you somewhere, if you will tell me
     where and when; or else I will go and see you in the studio, if you
     are sure to be alone. Please don't keep me waiting long for an
     answer.

     "You don't know what I'm suffering.

     "Your ever-loving, faithful friend,

     "TRILBY O'FERRALL."

She sent this letter by hand, and the Laird came in less than ten
minutes after she had sent it; and she hugged and kissed and cried over
him so that he was almost ready to cry himself; but he burst out
laughing instead--which was better and more in his line, and very much
more comforting--and talked to her so nicely and kindly and naturally
that by the time he left her humble attic in the Rue des Pousse-Cailloux
her very aspect, which had quite shocked him when he first saw her, had
almost become what it usually was.

The little room under the leads, with its sloping roof and mansard
window, was as scrupulously neat and clean as if its tenant had been a
holy sister who taught the noble daughters of France at some Convent of
the Sacred Heart. There were nasturtiums and mignonette on the outer
window-sill, and convolvulus was trained to climb round the window.

As she sat by his side on the narrow white bed, clasping and stroking
his painty, turpentiny hand, and kissing it every five minutes, he
talked to her like a father--as he told Taffy afterwards--and scolded
her for having been so silly as not to send for him directly, or come to
the studio. He said how glad he was, how glad they would all be, that
she was going to give up sitting for the figure--not, of course, that
there was any real harm in it, but it was better not--and especially how
happy it would make them to feel she intended to live straight for the
future. Little Billee was to remain at Barbizon for a little while; but
she must promise to come and dine with Taffy and himself that very day,
and cook the dinner; and when he went back to his picture, "Les Noces du
Toréador"--saying to her as he left, "à ce soir donc, mille sacrés
tonnerres de nong de Dew!"--he left the happiest woman in the whole
Latin quarter behind him: she had confessed and been forgiven.

And with shame and repentance and confession and forgiveness had come a
strange new feeling--that of a dawning self-respect.

Hitherto, for Trilby, self-respect had meant little more than the mere
cleanliness of her body, in which she had always revelled; alas! it was
one of the conditions of her humble calling. It now meant another kind
of cleanliness, and she would luxuriate in it for evermore; and the
dreadful past--never to be forgotten by her--should be so lived down as
in time, perhaps, to be forgotten by others.

The dinner that evening was a memorable one for Trilby. After she had
washed up the knives and forks and plates and dishes, and put them by,
she sat and sewed. She wouldn't even smoke her cigarette, it reminded
her so of things and scenes she now hated. No more cigarettes for Trilby
O'Ferrall.

They all talked of Little Billee. She heard about the way he had been
brought up, about his mother and sister, the people he had always lived
among. She also heard (and her heart alternately rose and sank as she
listened) what his future was likely to be, and how rare his genius was,
and how great--if his friends were to be trusted. Fame and fortune would
soon be his--such fame and fortune as fell to the lot of very
few--unless anything should happen to spoil his promise and mar his
prospects in life, and ruin a splendid career; and the rising of the
heart was all for him, the sinking for herself. How could she ever hope
to be even the friend of such a man? Might she ever hope to be his
servant--his faithful, humble servant?

       *       *       *       *       *

Little Billee spent a month at Barbizon, and when he came back it was
with such a brown face that his friends hardly knew him; and he brought
with him such studies as made his friends "sit up."

The crushing sense of their own hopeless inferiority was lost in wonder
at his work, in love and enthusiasm for the workman.

[Illustration: CONFESSION]

Their Little Billee, so young and tender, so weak of body, so strong of
purpose, so warm of heart, so light of hand, so keen and quick and
piercing of brain and eye, was their master, to be stuck on a pedestal
and looked up to and bowed down to, to be watched and warded and
worshipped for evermore.

When Trilby came in from her work at six, and he shook hands with her
and said "Hullo, Trilby!" her face turned pale to the lips, her
under-lip quivered, and she gazed down at him (for she was among the
tallest of her sex) with such a moist, hungry, wide-eyed look of humble
craving adoration that the Laird felt his worst fears were realized, and
the look Little Billee sent up in return filled the manly bosom of Taffy
with an equal apprehension.

Then they all four went and dined together at le père Trin's, and Trilby
went back to her _blanchisserie de fin_.

Next day Little Billee took his work to show Carrel, and Carrel invited
him to come and finish his picture "The Pitcher Goes to the Well" at his
own private studio--an unheard-of favor, which the boy accepted with a
thrill of proud gratitude and affectionate reverence.

So little was seen for some time of Little Billee at the studio in the
Place St. Anatole des Arts, and little of Trilby; a _blanchisseuse de
fin_ has not many minutes to spare from her irons. But they often met at
dinner. And on Sunday mornings Trilby came to repair the Laird's linen
and darn his socks and look after his little comforts, as usual, and
spend a happy day. And on Sunday afternoons the studio would be as
lively as ever, with the fencing and boxing, the piano-playing and
fiddling--all as it used to be.

And week by week the friends noticed a gradual and subtle change in
Trilby. She was no longer slangy in French, unless it were now and then
by a slip of the tongue, no longer so facetious and droll, and yet she
seemed even happier than she had ever seemed before.

Also, she grew thinner, especially in the face, where the bones of her
cheeks and jaw began to show themselves, and these bones were
constructed on such right principles (as were those of her brow and chin
and the bridge of her nose) that the improvement was astonishing, almost
inexplicable.

Also, she lost her freckles as the summer waned and she herself went
less into the open air. And she let her hair grow, and made of it a
small knot at the back of her head, and showed her little flat ears,
which were charming, and just in the right place, very far back and
rather high; Little Billee could not have placed them better himself.
Also, her mouth, always too large, took on a firmer and sweeter outline,
and her big British teeth were so white and even that even Frenchmen
forgave them their British bigness. And a new soft brightness came into
her eyes that no one had ever seen there before. They were stars, just
twin gray stars--or rather planets just thrown off by some new sun, for
the steady mellow light they gave out was not entirely their own.

Favorite types of beauty change with each succeeding generation. These
were the days of Buckner's aristocratic Album beauties, with lofty
foreheads, oval faces, little aquiline noses, heart-shaped little
mouths, soft dimpled chins, drooping shoulders, and long side ringlets
that fell over them--the Lady Arabellas and the Lady Clementinas,
Musidoras and Medoras! A type that will perhaps come back to us some
day.

May the present scribe be dead!

Trilby's type would be infinitely more admired now than in the fifties.
Her photograph would be in the shop-windows. Sir Edward Burne-Jones--if
I may make so bold as to say so--would perhaps have marked her for his
own, in spite of her almost too exuberant joyousness and irrepressible
vitality. Rossetti might have evolved another new formula from her; Sir
John Millais another old one of the kind that is always new and never
sates nor palls--like Clytie, let us say--ever old and ever new as love
itself!

Trilby's type was in singular contrast to the type Gavarni had made so
popular in the Latin quarter at the period we are writing of, so that
those who fell so readily under her charm were rather apt to wonder why.
Moreover, she was thought much too tall for her sex, and her day, and
her station in life, and especially for the country she lived in. She
hardly looked up to a bold gendarme! and a bold gendarme was nearly as
tall as a "dragon de la garde," who was nearly as tall as an average
English policeman. Not that she was a giantess, by any means. She was
about as tall as Miss Ellen Terry--and that is a charming height, _I_
think.

[Illustration: "ALL AS IT USED TO BE"]

One day Taffy remarked to the Laird: "Hang it! I'm blest if Trilby isn't
the handsomest woman I know! She looks like a grande dame masquerading
as a grisette--almost like a joyful saint at times. She's lovely! By
Jove! I couldn't stand her hugging me as she does you! There'd be a
tragedy--say the slaughter of Little Billee."

"Ah! Taffy, my boy," rejoined the Laird, "when those long sisterly arms
are round my neck it isn't _me_ she's hugging."

"And then," said Taffy, "what a trump she is! Why, she's as upright and
straight and honorable as a man! And what she says to one about one's
self is always so pleasant to hear! That's Irish, I suppose. And, what's
more, it's always true."

"Ah, that's Scotch!" said the Laird, and tried to wink at Little Billee,
but Little Billee wasn't there.

[Illustration: "TWIN GRAY STARS"]

Even Svengali perceived the strange metamorphosis. "Ach, Drilpy," he
would say, on a Sunday afternoon, "how beautiful you are! It drives me
mad! I adore you. I like you thinner; you have such beautiful bones! Why
do you not answer my letters? What! you do not _read_ them? You _burn_
them? And yet I--Donnerwetter! I forgot! The grisettes of the quartier
latin have not learned how to read or write; they have only learned how
to dance the cancan with the dirty little pig-dog monkeys they call men.
Sacrement! We will teach the little pig-dog monkeys to dance something
else some day, we Germans. We will make music for them to dance to!
Boum! boum! Better than the waiter at the Café de la Rotonde, hein? And
the grisettes of the quartier latin shall pour us out your little white
wine--'fotre betit fin planc,' as your pig-dog monkey of a poet says,
your rotten verfluchter De Musset, 'who has got such a splendid future
behind him'! Bah! What do _you_ know of Monsieur Alfred de Musset? We
have got a poet too, my Drilpy. His name is Heinrich Heine. If he's
still alive, he lives in Paris, in a little street off the Champs
Élysées. He lies in bed all day long, and only sees out of one eye, like
the Countess Hahn-Hahn, ha! ha! He adores French grisettes. He married
one. Her name is Mathilde, and she has got süssen füssen, like you. He
would adore you too, for your beautiful bones; he would like to count
them one by one, for he is very playful, like me. And, ach! what a
beautiful skeleton you will make! And very soon, too, because you do not
smile on your madly-loving Svengali. You burn his letters without
reading them! You shall have a nice little mahogany glass case all to
yourself in the museum of the École de Médecine, and Svengali shall come
in his new fur-lined coat, smoking his big cigar of the Havana, and push
the dirty carabins out of the way, and look through the holes of your
eyes into your stupid empty skull, and up the nostrils of your high bony
sounding-board of a nose without either a tip or a lip to it, and into
the roof of your big mouth, with your thirty-two big English teeth, and
between your big ribs into your big chest, where the big leather lungs
used to be, and say, 'Ach! what a pity she had no more music in her than
a big tomcat!' And then he will look all down your bones to your poor
crumbling feet, and say, 'Ach! what a fool she was not to answer
Svengali's letters!' and the dirty carabins shall--"

"Shut up, you sacred fool, or I'll precious soon spoil _your_ skeleton
for you."

Thus the short-tempered Taffy, who had been listening.

Then Svengali, scowling, would play Chopin's funeral march more divinely
than ever; and where the pretty, soft part comes in, he would whisper to
Trilby, "That is Svengali coming to look at you in your little mahogany
glass case!"

And here let me say that these vicious imaginations of Svengali's, which
look so tame in English print, sounded much more ghastly in French,
pronounced with a Hebrew-German accent, and uttered in his hoarse,
rasping, nasal, throaty rook's caw, his big yellow teeth baring
themselves in a mongrel canine snarl, his heavy upper eyelids drooping
over his insolent black eyes.

Besides which, as he played the lovely melody he would go through a
ghoulish pantomime, as though he were taking stock of the different
bones in her skeleton with greedy but discriminating approval. And when
he came down to the feet, he was almost droll in the intensity of his
terrible realism. But Trilby did not appreciate this exquisite fooling,
and felt cold all over.

He seemed to her a dread, powerful demon, who, but for Taffy (who alone
could hold him in check), oppressed and weighed on her like an
incubus--and she dreamed of him oftener than she dreamed of Taffy, the
Laird, or even Little Billee!

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus pleasantly and smoothly, and without much change or adventure,
things went on till Christmastime.

Little Billee seldom spoke of Trilby, or Trilby of him. Work went on
every morning at the studio in the Place St. Anatole des Arts, and
pictures were begun and finished--little pictures that didn't take long
to paint--the Laird's Spanish bull-fighting scenes, in which the bull
never appeared, and which he sent to his native Dundee and sold there;
Taffy's tragic little dramas of life in the slums of Paris--starvings,
drownings--suicides by charcoal and poison--which he sent everywhere,
but did not sell.

[Illustration: "AN INCUBUS"]

Little Billee was painting all this time at Carrel's studio--his private
one--and seemed preoccupied and happy when they all met at mealtime, and
less talkative even than usual.

He had always been the least talkative of the three; more prone to
listen, and no doubt to think the more.

In the afternoon people came and went as usual, and boxed and fenced and
did gymnastic feats, and felt Taffy's biceps, which by this time
equalled Mr. Sandow's!

Some of these people were very pleasant and remarkable, and have become
famous since then in England, France, America--or have died, or married,
and come to grief or glory in other ways. It is the Ballad of the
Bouillabaisse all over again!

It might be worth while my trying to sketch some of the more noteworthy,
now that my story is slowing for a while--like a French train when the
engine-driver sees a long curved tunnel in front of him, as I do--and no
light at the other end!

My humble attempts at characterization might be useful as "mémoires pour
servir" to future biographers. Besides, there are other reasons, as the
reader will soon discover.

There was Durien, for instance--Trilby's especial French adorer, "pour
le bon motif!" a son of the people, a splendid sculptor, a very fine
character in every way--so perfect, indeed, that there is less to say
about him than any of the others--modest, earnest, simple, frugal,
chaste, and of untiring industry; living for his art, and perhaps also a
little for Trilby, whom he would have been only too glad to marry. He
was Pygmalion; she was his Galatea--a Galatea whose marble heart would
never beat for _him_!

Durien's house is now the finest in the Parc Monceau; his wife and
daughters are the best-dressed women in Paris, and he one of the
happiest of men; but he will never quite forget poor Galatea:

"La belle aux pieds d'albâtre--aux deux talons de rose!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was Vincent, a Yankee medical student, who could both work
and play.

He is now one of the greatest oculists in the world, and Europeans cross
the Atlantic to consult him. He can still play, and when he crosses the
Atlantic himself for that purpose he has to travel incognito like a
royalty, lest his play should be marred by work. And his daughters are
so beautiful and accomplished that British dukes have sighed after them
in vain. Indeed, these fair young ladies spend their autumn holiday in
refusing the British aristocracy. We are told so in the society papers,
and I can quite believe it. Love is not always blind; and if he is,
Vincent is the man to cure him.

In those days he prescribed for us all round, and punched and
stethoscoped us, and looked at our tongues for love, and told us what to
eat, drink, and avoid, and even where to go for it.

For instance: late one night Little Billee woke up in a cold sweat, and
thought himself a dying man--he had felt seedy all day and taken no
food; so he dressed and dragged himself to Vincent's hotel, and woke him
up, and said, "Oh, Vincent, Vincent! I'm a dying man!" and all but
fainted on his bed. Vincent felt him all over with the greatest care,
and asked him many questions. Then, looking at his watch, he delivered
himself thus: "Humph! 3.30! rather late--but still--look here, Little
Billee--do you know the Halle, on the other side of the water, where
they sell vegetables?"

"Oh yes! yes! What vegetable shall I--"

"Listen! On the north side are two restaurants, Bordier and Baratte.
They remain open all night. Now go straight off to one of those tuck
shops, and tuck in as big a supper as you possibly can. Some people
prefer Baratte. I prefer Bordier myself. Perhaps you'd better try
Bordier first and Baratte after. At all events, lose no time; so off you
go!"

Thus he saved Little Billee from an early grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was the Greek, a boy of only sixteen, but six feet high, and
looking ten years older than he was, and able to smoke even stronger
tobacco than Taffy himself, and color pipes divinely; he was a great
favorite in the Place St. Anatole, for his _bonhomie_, his niceness, his
warm geniality. He was the capitalist of this select circle (and nobly
lavish of his capital). He went by the name of Poluphloisboiospaleapologos
Petrilopetrolicoconose--for so he was christened by the Laird--because
his real name was thought much too long and much too lovely for the
quartier latin, and reminded one of the Isles of Greece--where burning
Sappho loved and sang.

What was he learning in the Latin quarter? French? He spoke French like
a native! Nobody knows. But when his Paris friends transferred their
bohemia to London, where were they ever made happier and more at home
than in his lordly parental abode--or fed with nicer things?

[Illustration: THE CAPITALIST AND THE SWELL]

That abode is now his, and lordlier than ever, as becomes the dwelling
of a millionaire and city magnate; and its gray-bearded owner is as
genial, as jolly, and as hospitable as in the old Paris days, but he no
longer colors pipes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was Carnegie, fresh from Balliol, redolent of the 'varsity.
He intended himself then for the diplomatic service, and came to Paris
to learn French as it is spoke; and spent most of his time with his
fashionable English friends on the right side of the river, and the rest
with Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee on the left. Perhaps that is
why he has not become an ambassador. He is now only a rural dean, and
speaks the worst French I know, and speaks it wherever and whenever he
can.

It serves him right, I think.

He was fond of lords, and knew some (at least, he gave one that
impression), and often talked of them, and dressed so beautifully that
even Little Billee was abashed in his presence. Only Taffy, in his
threadbare out-at-elbow shooting-jacket and cricket cap, and the Laird,
in his tattered straw hat and Taffy's old overcoat down to his heels,
dared to walk arm in arm with him--nay, insisted on doing so--as they
listened to the band in the Luxembourg Gardens.

And his whiskers were even longer and thicker and more golden than
Taffy's own. But the mere sight of a boxing-glove made him sick.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was the yellow-haired Antony, a Swiss--the idle apprentice,
le "roi des truands," as we called him--to whom everything was
forgiven, as to François Villon, _à cause de ses gentillesses_ surely,
for all his reprehensible pranks, the gentlest and most lovable creature
that ever lived in bohemia, or out of it.

Always in debt, like Svengali--for he had no more notion of the value of
money than a humming-bird, and gave away in reckless generosity to
friends what in strictness belonged to his endless creditors--like
Svengali, humorous, witty, and a most exquisite and original artist, and
also somewhat eccentric in his attire (though scrupulously clean), so
that people would stare at him as he walked along--a thing that always
gave him dire offence! But unlike Svengali, full of delicacy,
refinement, and distinction of mind and manner--void of any
self-conceit--and, in spite of the irregularities of his life, the very
soul of truth and honor, as gentle as he was chivalrous and brave--the
warmest, stanchest, sincerest, most unselfish friend in the world; and,
as long as his purse was full, the best and drollest boon companion in
the world--but that was not forever!

When the money was gone, then would Antony hie him to some beggarly
attic in some lost Parisian slum, and write his own epitaph in lovely
French or German verse--or even English (for he was an astounding
linguist); and, telling himself that he was forsaken by family, friends,
and mistress alike, look out of his casement over the Paris chimney-pots
for the last time, and listen once more to "the harmonies of nature," as
he called it--and "aspire towards the infinite," and bewail "the cruel
deceptions of his life"--and finally lay himself down to die of sheer
starvation.

And as he lay and waited for his release that was so long in coming, he
would beguile the weary hours by mumbling a crust "watered with his own
salt tears," and decorating his epitaph with fanciful designs of the
most exquisite humor, pathos, and beauty--these illustrated epitaphs of
the young Antony, of which there exists a goodly number, are now
priceless, as all collectors know all over the world.

Fainter and fainter would he grow--and finally, on the third day or
thereabouts, a remittance would reach him from some long-suffering
sister or aunt in far Lausanne--or else the fickle mistress or faithless
friend (who had been looking for him all over Paris) would discover his
hiding-place, the beautiful epitaph would be walked off in triumph to le
père Marcas in the Rue du Ghette and sold for twenty, fifty, a hundred
francs--and then _Vogue la galére!_ And back again to bohemia, dear
bohemia and all its joys, as long as the money lasted ... _e poi, da
capo!_

And now that his name is a household word in two hemispheres, and he
himself an honor and a glory to the land he has adopted as his own, he
loves to remember all this and look back from the lofty pinnacle on
which he sits perched up aloft to the impecunious days of his idle
apprenticeship--_le bon temps où l'on était si malheureux!_

And with all that Quixotic dignity of his, so famous is he as a wit that
when he jokes (and he is always joking) people laugh first, and then ask
what he was joking about. And you can even make your own mild funniments
raise a roar by merely prefacing them "as Antony once said!"

The present scribe has often done so.

And if by a happy fluke you should some day hit upon a really good thing
of your own--good enough to be quoted--be sure it will come back to you
after many days prefaced "as Antony once said."

And these jokes are so good-natured that you almost resent their being
made at anybody's expense but your own--never from Antony

    "The aimless jest that striking has caused pain,
     The idle word that he'd wish back again!"

Indeed, in spite of his success, I don't suppose he ever made an enemy
in his life.

And here, let me add (lest there be any doubt as to his identity), that
he is now tall and stout and strikingly handsome, though rather
bald--and such an aristocrat in bearing, aspect, and manner that you
would take him for a blue-blooded descendant of the crusaders instead of
the son of a respectable burgher in Lausanne.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was Lorrimer, the industrious apprentice, who is now also
well-pinnacled on high; himself a pillar of the Royal Academy--probably,
if he lives long enough, its future president--the duly knighted or
baroneted Lord Mayor of "all the plastic arts" (except one or two
perhaps, here and there, that are not altogether without some
importance).

May this not be for many, many years! Lorrimer himself would be the
first to say so!

Tall, thin, red-haired, and well-favored, he was a most eager, earnest,
and painstaking young enthusiast, of precocious culture, who read
improving books, and did not share in the amusements of the quartier
latin, but spent his evenings at home with Handel, Michael Angelo, and
Dante, on the respectable side of the river. Also, he went into good
society sometimes, with a dress-coat on, and a white tie, and his hair
parted in the middle!

But in spite of these blemishes on his otherwise exemplary record as an
art student, he was the most delightful companion--the most
affectionate, helpful, and sympathetic of friends. May he live long and
prosper!

Enthusiast as he was, he could only worship one god at a time. It was
either Michael Angelo, Phidias, Paul Veronese, Tintoret, Raphael, or
Titian--never a modern--moderns didn't exist! And so thoroughgoing was
he in his worship, and so persistent in voicing it, that he made those
immortals quite unpopular in the Place St. Anatole des Arts. We grew to
dread their very names. Each of them would last him a couple of months
or so; then he would give us a month's holiday, and take up another.

Antony did not think much of Lorrimer in those days, nor Lorrimer of
him, for all they were such good friends. And neither of them thought
much of Little Billee, whose pinnacle (of pure unadulterated fame) is
now the highest of all--the highest probably that can be for a mere
painter of pictures!

And what is so nice about Lorrimer, now that he is a graybeard, an
academician, an accomplished man of the world and society, is that he
admires Antony's genius more than he can say--and reads Mr. Rudyard
Kipling's delightful stories as well as Dante's "Inferno"--and can
listen with delight to the lovely songs of Signor Tosti, who has not
precisely founded himself on Handel--can even scream with laughter at a
comic song--even a nigger melody--so, at least, that it but be sung in
well-bred and distinguished company--for Lorrimer is no bohemian.

    "Shoo, fly! don'tcher bother me!
     For I belong to the Comp'ny G!"

Both these famous men are happily (and most beautifully)
married--grandfathers, for all I know--and "move in the very best
society" (Lorrimer always, I'm told; Antony now and then); "la haute,"
as it used to be called in French bohemia--meaning dukes and lords and
even royalties, I suppose, and those who love them and whom they love.

That _is_ the best society, isn't it? At all events, we are assured it
used to be; but that must have been before the present scribe (a meek
and somewhat innocent outsider) had been privileged to see it with his
own little eye.

And when they happen to meet there (Antony and Lorrimer, I mean), I
don't expect they rush very wildly into each other's arms, or talk very
fluently about old times. Nor do I suppose their wives are very
intimate. None of our wives are. Not even Taffy's and the Laird's.

Oh, Orestes! Oh, Pylades!

Oh, ye impecunious, unpinnacled young inseparables of eighteen,
nineteen, twenty, even twenty-five, who share each other's thoughts and
purses, and wear each other's clothes, and swear each other's oaths,
and smoke each other's pipes, and respect each other's lights o' love,
and keep each other's secrets, and tell each other's jokes, and pawn
each other's watches and merrymake together on the proceeds, and sit all
night by each other's bedsides in sickness, and comfort each other in
sorrow and disappointment with silent, manly sympathy--"wait till you
get to forty year!"

Wait even till each or either of you gets himself a little pinnacle of
his own--be it ever so humble!

Nay, wait till either or each of you gets himself a wife!

History goes on repeating itself, and so do novels, and this is a
platitude, and there's nothing new under the sun.

May too cecee (as the idiomatic Laird would say, in the language he
adores)--may too cecee ay nee eecee nee láh!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then there was Dodor, the handsome young dragon de la garde--a full
private, if you please, with a beardless face, and damask-rosy cheeks,
and a small waist, and narrow feet like a lady's, and who, strange to
say, spoke English just like an Englishman.

And his friend Gontran, _alias_ l'Zouzou--a corporal in the Zouaves.

Both of these worthies had met Taffy in the Crimea, and frequented the
studios in the quartier latin, where they adored (and were adored by)
the grisettes and models, especially Trilby.

Both of them were distinguished for being the worst subjects (_les plus
mauvais sujets_) of their respective regiments; yet both were special
favorites not only with their fellow-rankers, but with those in command,
from their colonels downward.

Both were in the habit of being promoted to the rank of corporal or
brigadier, and degraded to the rank of private next day for general
misconduct, the result of a too exuberant delight in their promotion.

Neither of them knew fear, envy, malice, temper, or low spirits; ever
said or did an ill-natured thing; ever even thought one; ever had an
enemy but himself. Both had the best or the worst manners going,
according to their company, whose manners they reflected; they were true
chameleons!

Both were always ready to share their last ten-sou piece (not that they
ever seemed to have one) with each other or anybody else, or anybody
else's last ten-sou piece with you; to offer you a friend's cigar; to
invite you to dine with any friend they had; to fight with you, or for
you, at a moment's notice. And they made up for all the anxiety,
tribulation, shame, and sorrow they caused at home by the endless fun
and amusement they gave to all outside.

It was a pretty dance they led; but our three friends of the Place St.
Anatole (who hadn't got to pay the pipers) loved them both, especially
Dodor.

One fine Sunday afternoon Little Billee found himself studying life and
character in that most delightful and festive scene la Fête de St.
Cloud, and met Dodor and l'Zouzou there, who hailed him with delight,
saying:

"Nous allons joliment jubiler, nom d'une pipe!" and insisted on his
joining in their amusements and paying for them--roundabouts, swings,
the giant, the dwarf, the strong man, the fat woman--to whom they made
love and were taken too seriously, and turned out--the menagerie of wild
beasts, whom they teased and aggravated till the police had to
interfere. Also _al fresco_ dances, where their cancan step was of the
wildest and most unbridled character, till a sous-officier or a gendarme
came in sight, and then they danced quite mincingly and demurely, _en
maître d'école_, as they called it, to the huge delight of an immense
and ever-increasing crowd, and the disgust of all truly respectable men.

They also insisted on Little Billee's walking between them, arm in arm,
and talking to them in English whenever they saw coming towards them a
respectable English family with daughters. It was the dragoon's delight
to get himself stared at by fair daughters of Albion for speaking as
good English as themselves--a rare accomplishment in a French
trooper--and Zouzou's happiness to be thought English too, though the
only English he knew was the phrase "I will not! I will not!" which he
had picked up in the Crimea, and repeated over and over again when he
came within ear-shot of a pretty English girl.

Little Billee was not happy in these circumstances. He was no snob. But
he was a respectably brought-up young Briton of the higher middle class,
and it was not quite pleasant for him to be seen (by fair countrywomen
of his own) walking arm in arm on a Sunday afternoon with a couple of
French private soldiers, and uncommonly rowdy ones at that.

[Illustration: "'I WILL NOT! I WILL NOT!'"]

Later, they came back to Paris together on the top of an omnibus,
among a very proletarian crowd, and there the two facetious warriors
immediately made themselves pleasant all round and became very popular,
especially with the women and children; but not, I regret to say,
through the propriety, refinement, and discretion of their behavior.
Little Billee resolved that he would not go a-pleasuring with them any
more.

However, they stuck to him through thick and thin, and insisted on
escorting him all the way back to the quartier latin, by the Pont de la
Concorde and the Rue de Lille in the Faubourg St. Germain.

Little Billee loved the Faubourg St. Germain, especially the Rue de
Lille. He was fond of gazing at the magnificent old mansions, the
"hôtels" of the old French noblesse, or rather the outside walls
thereof, the grand sculptured portals with the armorial bearings and the
splendid old historic names above them--Hôtel de This, Hôtel de That,
Rohan-Chabot, Montmorency, La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, La Tour
d'Auvergne.

He would forget himself in romantic dreams of past and forgotten French
chivalry which these glorious names called up; for he knew a little of
French history, loving to read Froissart and Saint-Simon and the genial
Brantôme.

Halting opposite one of the finest and oldest of all these gateways, his
especial favorite, labelled "Hôtel de la Rochemartel" in letters of
faded gold over a ducal coronet and a huge escutcheon of stone, he began
to descant upon its architectural beauties and noble proportions to
l'Zouzou.

"_Parbleu!_" said l'Zouzou, "_connu_, _farceur!_ why, I was _born_
there, on the 6th of March, 1834, at 5.30 in the morning. Lucky day for
France--_hein_?"

"Born there? what do you mean--in the porter's lodge?"

At this juncture the two great gates rolled back, a liveried Suisse
appeared, and an open carriage and pair came out, and in it were two
elderly ladies and a younger one.

[Illustration: DODOR IN HIS GLORY]

To Little Billee's indignation, the two incorrigible warriors made the
military salute, and the three ladies bowed stiffly and gravely.

And then (to Little Billee's horror this time) one of them happened to
look back, and Zouzou actually kissed his hand to her.

"Do you _know_ that lady?" asked Little Billee, very sternly.

"_Parbleu! si je la connais!_ Why, it's my mother! Isn't she nice? She's
rather cross with me just now."

"Your _mother_! Why, what do you mean? What on earth would your mother
be doing in that big carriage and at that big house?"

"_Parbleu, farceur!_ She lives there!"

"_Lives_ there! Why, who and what is she, your mother?"

"The Duchesse de la Rochemartel, _parbleu!_ and that's my sister; and
that's my aunt, Princess de Chevagné-Bauffremont! She's the '_patronne_'
of that _chic_ equipage. She's a millionaire, my aunt Chevagné!"

"Well, I never! What's _your_ name, then?"

"Oh, _my_ name! Hang it--let me see!
Well--Gontran-Xavier--François--Marie--Joseph d'Amaury--Brissac de
Roncesvaulx de la Rochemartel-Boisségur, at your service!"

"Quite correct!" said Dodor; "_l'enfant dit vrai!_"

"Well--I--never! And what's _your_ name, Dodor?"

"Oh! I'm only a humble individual, and answer to the one-horse name of
Théodore Rigolot de Lafarce. But Zouzou's an awful swell, you know--his
brother's the Duke!"

[Illustration: HÔTEL DE LA ROCHEMARTEL]

Little Billee was no snob. But he was a respectably brought-up young
Briton of the higher middle class, and these revelations, which he could
not but believe, astounded him so that he could hardly speak. Much as he
flattered himself that he scorned the bloated aristocracy, titles are
titles--even French titles!--and when it comes to dukes and princesses
who live in houses like the Hôtel de la Rochemartel ...!

It's enough to take a respectably brought-up young Briton's breath away!

When he saw Taffy that evening, he exclaimed: "I say, Zouzou's mother's
a duchess!"

"Yes--the Duchesse de la Rochemartel-Boisségur."

"You never told me!"

"You never asked me. It's one of the greatest names in France. They're
very poor, I believe."

"Poor! You should see the house they live in!"

"I've been there, to dinner; and the dinner wasn't very good. They let a
great part of it, and live mostly in the country. The Duke is Zouzou's
brother; very unlike Zouzou; he's consumptive and unmarried, and the
most respectable man in Paris. Zouzou will be the Duke some day."

"And Dodor--he's a swell, too, I suppose--he says he's _de_ something or
other!"

"Yes--Rigolot de Lafarce. I've no doubt he descends from the Crusaders,
too; the name seems to favor it, anyhow; and such lots of them do in
this country. His mother was English, and bore the worthy name of Brown.
He was at school in England; that's why he speaks English so well--and
behaves so badly, perhaps! He's got a very beautiful sister, married to
a man in the 60th Rifles--Jack Reeve, a son of Lord Reevely's; a selfish
sort of chap. I don't suppose he gets on very well with his
brother-in-law. Poor Dodor! His sister's about the only living thing he
cares for--except Zouzou."

       *       *       *       *       *

I wonder if the bland and genial Monsieur Théodore--"notre Sieur
Théodore"--now junior partner in the great haberdashery firm of
"Passefil et Rigolot," on the Boulevard des Capucines, and a pillar of
the English chapel in the Rue Marbœuf, is very hard on his employés
and employées if they are a little late at their counters on a Monday
morning?

I wonder if that stuck-up, stingy, stodgy, communard-shooting,
church-going, time-serving, place-hunting, pious-eyed, pompous old prig,
martinet, and philistine, Monsieur le Maréchal-Duc de la
Rochemartel-Boisségur, ever tells Madame la Maréchale-Duchesse (_née_
Hunks, of Chicago) how once upon a time Dodor and he--

We will tell no tales out of school.

The present scribe is no snob. He is a respectably brought-up old Briton
of the higher middle-class--at least, he flatters himself so. And he
writes for just such old philistines as himself, who date from a time
when titles were not thought so cheap as to-day. Alas! all reverence for
all that is high and time-honored and beautiful seems at a discount.

So he has kept his blackguard ducal Zouave for the bouquet of this
little show--the final _bonne bouche_ in his bohemian _menu_--that he
may make it palatable to those who only look upon the good old quartier
latin (now no more to speak of) as a very low, common, vulgar quarter
indeed, deservedly swept away, where misters the students (shocking
bounders and cads) had nothing better to do, day and night, than mount
up to a horrid place called the thatched house--_la chaumière_--

     "Pour y danser le cancan
      Ou le Robert Macaire--
      Toujours--toujours--toujours--
      La nuit comme le jour ...
      Et youp! youp! youp!
    Tra la la la la ... la la la!"

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

Christmas was drawing near.

There were days when the whole quartier latin would veil its iniquities
under fogs almost worthy of the Thames Valley between London Bridge and
Westminster, and out of the studio window the prospect was a dreary
blank. No morgue! no towers of Notre Dame! not even the chimney-pots
over the way--not even the little mediæval toy turret at the corner of
the Rue Vieille des Mauvais Ladres, Little Billee's delight!

The stove had to be crammed till its sides grew a dull deep red before
one's fingers could hold a brush or squeeze a bladder; one had to box or
fence at nine in the morning, that one might recover from the cold bath,
and get warm for the rest of the day!

Taffy and the Laird grew pensive and dreamy, childlike and bland; and
when they talked it was generally about Christmas at home in merry
England and the distant land of cakes, and how good it was to be there
at such a time--hunting, shooting, curling, and endless carouse!

It was Ho! for the jolly West Riding, and Hey! for the bonnets of Bonnie
Dundee, till they grew quite homesick, and wanted to start by the very
next train.

They didn't do anything so foolish. They wrote over to friends in London
for the biggest turkey, the biggest plum-pudding, that could be got for
love or money, with mince-pies, and holly and mistletoe, and sturdy,
short, thick English sausages, half a Stilton cheese, and a sirloin of
beef--two sirloins, in case one should not be enough.

For they meant to have a Homeric feast in the studio on Christmas
Day--Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee--and invite all the delightful
chums I have been trying to describe; and that is just why I tried to
describe them--Durien, Vincent, Antony, Lorrimer, Carnegie,
Petrolicoconose, l'Zouzou, and Dodor!

The cooking and waiting should be done by Trilby, her friend Angèle
Boisse, M. et Mme. Vinard, and such little Vinards as could be trusted
with glass and crockery and mince-pies; and if that was not enough, they
would also cook themselves and wait upon each other.

When dinner should be over, supper was to follow with scarcely any
interval to speak of; and to partake of this other guests should be
bidden--Svengali and Gecko, and perhaps one or two more. No ladies!

For, as the unsusceptible Laird expressed it, in the language of a
gillie he had once met at a servants' dance in a Highland country-house,
"Them wimmen spiles the ball!"

Elaborate cards of invitation were sent out, in the designing and
ornamentation of which the Laird and Taffy exhausted all their fancy
(Little Billee had no time).

Wines and spirits and English beers were procured at great cost from M.
E. Delevingne's, in the Rue St. Honoré, and liqueurs of every
description--chartreuse, curaçoa, ratafia de cassis, and anisette; no
expense was spared.

Also, truffled galantines of turkey, tongues, hams, rillettes de Tours,
pâtés de foie gras, "fromage d'Italie" (which has nothing to do with
cheese), saucissons d'Arles et de Lyon, with and without garlic, cold
jellies peppery and salt--everything that French charcutiers and their
wives can make out of French pigs, or any other animal whatever, beast,
bird, or fowl (even cats and rats), for the supper; and sweet jellies,
and cakes, and sweetmeats, and confections of all kinds, from the famous
pastry-cook at the corner of the Rue Castiglione.

Mouths went watering all day long in joyful anticipation. They water
somewhat sadly now at the mere remembrance of these delicious
things--the mere immediate sight or scent of which in these degenerate
latter days would no longer avail to promote any such delectable
secretion. Hélas! ahimè! ach weh! ay de mi! eheu! οἱμοι--in
point of fact, _alas_!

That is the very exclamation I wanted.

[Illustration: CHRISTMAS EVE]

Christmas Eve came round. The pieces of resistance and plum-pudding
and mince-pies had not yet arrived from London--but there was plenty of
time.

Les trois Angliches dined at le père Trin's, as usual, and played
billiards and dominos at the Café du Luxembourg, and possessed their
souls in patience till it was time to go and hear the midnight mass at
the Madeleine, where Roucouly, the great barytone of the Opéra Comique,
was retained to sing Adam's famous Noël.

The whole quartier seemed alive with the réveillon. It was a clear,
frosty night, with a splendid moon just past the full, and most
exhilarating was the walk along the quays on the Rive Gauche, over the
Pont de la Concorde and across the Place thereof, and up the thronged
Rue de la Madeleine to the massive Parthenaic place of worship that
always has such a pagan, worldly look of smug and prosperous modernity.

They struggled manfully, and found standing and kneeling room among that
fervent crowd, and heard the impressive service with mixed feelings, as
became true Britons of very advanced liberal and religious opinions; not
with the unmixed contempt of the proper British Orthodox (who were there
in full force, one may be sure).

But their susceptible hearts soon melted at the beautiful music, and in
mere sensuous _attendrissement_ they were quickly in unison with all the
rest.

For as the clock struck twelve out pealed the organ, and up rose the
finest voice in France:

    "Minuit, Chrétiens! c'est l'heure solennelle
     Où l'Homme-Dieu descendit parmi nous!"

And a wave of religious emotion rolled over Little Billee and submerged
him; swept him off his little legs, swept him out of his little self,
drowned him in a great seething surge of love--love of his kind, love of
love, love of life, love of death, love of all that is and ever was and
ever will be--a very large order indeed, even for Little Billee.

[Illustration: "'ALLONS GLYCÈRE! ROUGIS MON VERRE....'"]

And it seemed to him that he stretched out his arms for love to one
figure especially beloved beyond all the rest--one figure erect on high
with arms outstretched to him, in more than common fellowship of need;
not the sorrowful figure crowned with thorns, for it was in the likeness
of a woman; but never that of the Virgin Mother of Our Lord.

It was Trilby, Trilby, Trilby! a poor fallen sinner and waif all but
lost amid the scum of the most corrupt city on earth. Trilby weak and
mortal like himself, and in woful want of pardon! and in her gray
dovelike eyes he saw the shining of so great a love that he was abashed;
for well he knew that all that love was his, and would be his forever,
come what would or could.

    "Peuple, debout! Chante ta délivrance!
     _Noël! Noël! Voici le Rédempteur!_"

So sang and rang and pealed and echoed the big, deep, metallic barytone
bass--above the organ, above the incense, above everything else in the
world--till the very universe seemed to shake with the rolling thunder
of that great message of love and forgiveness!

Thus at least felt Little Billee, whose way it was to magnify and
exaggerate all things under the subtle stimulus of sound, and the
singing human voice had especially strange power to penetrate into his
inmost depths--even the voice of man!

And what voice but the deepest and gravest and grandest there is can
give worthy utterance to such a message as that, the epitome, the
abstract, the very essence of all collective humanity's wisdom at its
best!

Little Billee reached the Hôtel Corneille that night in a very exalted
frame of mind indeed, the loftiest, lowliest mood of all.

Now see what sport we are of trivial, base, ignoble earthly things!

Sitting on the door-step and smoking two cigars at once he found Ribot,
one of his fellow-lodgers, whose room was just under his own. Ribot was
so tipsy that he could not ring. But he could still sing, and did so at
the top of his voice. It was not the Noël of Adam that he sang. He had
not spent his réveillon in any church.

With the help of a sleepy waiter, Little Billee got the bacchanalian
into his room and lit his candle for him, and, disengaging himself from
his maudlin embraces, left him to wallow in solitude.

As he lay awake in his bed, trying to recall the deep and high emotions
of the evening, he heard the tipsy hog below tumbling about his room and
still trying to sing his senseless ditty:

                          "Allons, Glycère!
                          Rougis mon verre
    Du jus divin dont mon cœur est toujours jaloux ...
                          Et puis à table,
                          Bacchante aimable!
    Enivrons-nous (hic) Les g-glougloux sont des rendezvous!"...

Then the song ceased for a while, and soon there were other sounds, as
on a Channel steamer. Glougloux indeed!

Then the fear arose in Little Billee's mind lest the drunken beast
should set fire to his bedroom curtains. All heavenly visions were
chased away for the night....

Our hero, half-crazed with fear, disgust, and irritation, lay wide
awake, his nostrils on the watch for the smell of burning chintz or
muslin, and wondered how an educated man--for Ribot was a
law-student--could ever make such a filthy beast of himself as that! It
was a scandal--a disgrace; it was not to be borne; there should be no
forgiveness for such as Ribot--not even on Christmas Day! He would
complain to Madame Paul, the patronne; he would have Ribot turned out
into the street; he would leave the hotel himself the very next morning!
At last he fell asleep, thinking of all he would do; and thus,
ridiculously and ignominiously for Little Billee, ended the réveillon.

Next morning he complained to Madame Paul; and though he did not give
her warning, nor even insist on the expulsion of Ribot (who, as he heard
with a hard heart, was "bien malade ce matin"), he expressed himself
very severely on the conduct of that gentleman, and on the dangers from
fire that might arise from a tipsy man being trusted alone in a small
bedroom with chintz curtains and a lighted candle. If it hadn't been for
himself, he told her, Ribot would have slept on the door-step, and serve
him right! He was really grand in his virtuous indignation, in spite of
his imperfect French; and Madame Paul was deeply contrite for her
peccant lodger, and profuse in her apologies; and Little Billee began
his twenty-first Christmas Day like a Pharisee, thanking his star that
he was not as Ribot!




Part Fourth

                "Félicité passée
                 Qui ne peux revenir,
                 Tourment de ma pensée,
    Que n'ay-je, en te perdant, perdu le souvenir!"


Mid-day had struck. The expected hamper had not turned up in the Place
St. Anatole des Arts.

All Madame Vinard's kitchen battery was in readiness; Trilby and Madame
Angèle Boisse were in the studio, their sleeves turned up, and ready to
begin.

At twelve the trois Angliches and the two fair blanchisseuses sat down
to lunch in a very anxious frame of mind, and finished a pâté de foie
gras and two bottles of Burgundy between them, such was their
disquietude.

The guests had been invited for six o'clock.

Most elaborately they laid the cloth on the table they had borrowed from
the Hôtel de Seine, and settled who was to sit next to whom, and then
unsettled it, and quarrelled over it--Trilby, as was her wont in such
matters, assuming an authority that did not rightly belong to her, and
of course getting her own way in the end.

And that, as the Laird remarked, was her confounded Trilbyness.

Two o'clock--three--four--but no hamper! Darkness had almost set in. It
was simply maddening. They knelt on the divan, with their elbows on the
window-sill, and watched the street lamps popping into life along the
quays--and looked out through the gathering dusk for the van from the
Chemin de Fer du Nord--and gloomily thought of the Morgue, which they
could still make out across the river.

[Illustration: SOUVENIR]

At length the Laird and Trilby went off in a cab to the station--a long
drive--and, lo! before they came back the long-expected hamper arrived,
at six o'clock.

And with it Durien, Vincent, Antony, Lorrimer, Carnegie,
Petrolicoconose, Dodor, and l'Zouzou--the last two in uniform, as usual.

And suddenly the studio, which had been so silent, dark, and dull, with
Taffy and Little Billee sitting hopeless and despondent round the
stove, became a scene of the noisiest, busiest, and cheerfulest
animation. The three big lamps were lit, and all the Chinese lanterns.
The pieces of resistance and the pudding were whisked off by Trilby,
Angèle, and Madame Vinard to other regions--the porter's lodge and
Durien's studio (which had been lent for the purpose); and every one was
pressed into the preparations for the banquet. There was plenty for idle
hands to do. Sausages to be fried for the turkey, stuffing made, and
sauces, salads mixed, and punch--holly hung in festoons all round and
about--a thousand things. Everybody was so clever and good-humored that
nobody got in anybody's way--not even Carnegie, who was in evening dress
(to the Laird's delight). So they made him do the scullion's
work--cleaning, rinsing, peeling, etc.

The cooking of the dinner was almost better fun than the eating of it.
And though there were so many cooks, not even the broth was spoiled
(cockaleekie, from a receipt of the Laird's).

It was ten o'clock before they sat down to that most memorable repast.

Zouzou and Dodor, who had been the most useful and energetic of all its
cooks, apparently quite forgot they were due at their respective
barracks at that very moment: they had only been able to obtain "la
permission de dix heures." If they remembered it, the certainty that
next day Zouzou would be reduced to the ranks for the fifth time, and
Dodor confined to his barracks for a month, did not trouble them in the
least.

The waiting was as good as the cooking. The handsome, quick,
authoritative Madame Vinard was in a dozen places at once, and openly
prompted, rebuked, and ballyragged her husband into a proper smartness.
The pretty little Madame Angèle moved about as deftly and as quietly as
a mouse; which of course did not prevent them both from genially joining
in the general conversation whenever it wandered into French.

Trilby, tall, graceful, and stately, and also swift of action, though
more like Juno or Diana than Hebe, devoted herself more especially to
her own particular favorites--Durien, Taffy, the Laird, Little
Billee--and Dodor and Zouzou, whom she loved, and tutoyé'd en bonne
camarade as she served them with all there was of the choicest.

The two little Vinards did their little best--they scrupulously
respected the mince-pies, and only broke two bottles of oil and one of
Harvey sauce, which made their mother furious. To console them, the
Laird took one of them on each knee and gave them of his share of
plum-pudding and many other unaccustomed good things, so bad for their
little French tumtums.

The genteel Carnegie had never been at such a queer scene in his life.
It opened his mind--and Dodor and Zouzou, between whom he sat (the Laird
thought it would do him good to sit between a private soldier and a
humble corporal), taught him more French than he had learned during the
three months he had spent in Paris. It was a specialty of theirs. It was
more colloquial than what is generally used in diplomatic circles, and
stuck longer in the memory; but it hasn't interfered with his preferment
in the Church.

He quite unbent. He was the first to volunteer a song (without being
asked) when the pipes and cigars were lit, and after the usual toasts
had been drunk--her Majesty's health, Tennyson, Thackeray, and Dickens;
and John Leech.

He sang, with a very cracked and rather hiccupy voice, his only song (it
seems)--an English one, of which the burden, he explained, was French:

    "Veeverler veeverler veeverler vee
          Veeverler companyee!"

And Zouzou and Dodor complimented him so profusely on his French accent
that he was with difficulty prevented from singing it all over again.

Then everybody sang in rotation.

The Laird, with a capital barytone, sang

    "Hie diddle Dee for the Lowlands low,"

which was encored.

Little Billee sang "Little Billee."

Vincent sang

      "Old Joe kicking up behind and afore.
    And the yaller gal a-kicking up behind old Joe."

A capital song, with words of quite a masterly scansion.

Antony sang "Le Sire de Framboisy." Enthusiastic encore.

Lorrimer, inspired no doubt by the occasion, sang the "Hallelujah
Chorus," and accompanied himself on the piano, but failed to obtain an
encore.

Durien sang

    "Plaisir d'amour ne dure qu'un moment;
     Chagrin d'amour dure toute la vie...."

It was his favorite song, and one of the beautiful songs of the world,
and he sang it very well--and it became popular in the quartier latin
ever after.

The Greek couldn't sing, and very wisely didn't.

Zouzou sang capitally a capital song in praise of "le vin à quat' sous!"

Taffy, in a voice like a high wind (and with a very good imitation of
the Yorkshire brogue), sang a Somersetshire hunting-ditty, ending:

    "Of this 'ere song should I be axed the reason for to show,
     I don't exactly know, I don't exactly know!
     But all my fancy dwells upon Nancy,
                 And I sing Tally-ho!"

It is a quite superexcellent ditty, and haunts my memory to this day;
and one felt sure that Nancy was a dear and a sweet, wherever she lived,
and when. So Taffy was encored twice--once for her sake, once for his
own.

[Illustration: "MY SISTER DEAR"]

And finally, to the surprise of all, the bold dragoon sang (in English)
"My Sister Dear," out of _Masaniello_, with such pathos, and in a voice
so sweet and high and well in tune, that his audience felt almost weepy
in the midst of their jollification, and grew quite sentimental, as
Englishmen abroad are apt to do when they are rather tipsy and hear
pretty music, and think of their dear sisters across the sea, or their
friends' dear sisters.

Madame Vinard interrupted her Christmas dinner on the model-throne to
listen, and wept and wiped her eyes quite openly, and remarked to Madame
Boisse, who stood modestly close by: "Il est gentil tout plein, ce
dragon! Mon Dieu! comme il chante bien! Il est Angliche aussi, il
paraît. Ils sont joliment bien élevés, tous ces Angliches--tous plus
gentils les uns que les autres! et quant à Monsieur Litrebili, on lui
donnerait le bon Dieu sans confession!"

And Madame Boisse agreed.

Then Svengali and Gecko came, and the table had to be laid and decorated
anew, for it was supper-time.

Supper was even jollier than dinner, which had taken off the keen edge
of the appetites, so that every one talked at once--the true test of a
successful supper--except when Antony told some of his experiences of
bohemia; for instance, how, after staying at home all day for a month to
avoid his creditors, he became reckless one Sunday morning, and went to
the Bains Deligny, and jumped into a deep part by mistake, and was saved
from a watery grave by a bold swimmer, who turned out to be his
boot-maker, Satory, to whom he owed sixty francs--of all his duns the
one he dreaded the most--and who didn't let him go in a hurry.

Whereupon Svengali remarked that he also owed sixty francs to
Satory--"Mais comme che ne me baigne chamais, che n'ai rien à
craindre!"

Whereupon there was such a laugh that Svengali felt he had scored off
Antony at last and had a prettier wit. He flattered himself that he'd
got the laugh of Antony _this_ time.

And after supper Svengali and Gecko made such lovely music that
everybody was sobered and athirst again, and the punch-bowl, wreathed
with holly and mistletoe, was placed in the middle of the table, and
clean glasses set all round it.

[Illustration: A DUCAL FRENCH FIGHTING-COCK]

Then Dodor and l'Zouzou stood up to dance with Trilby and Madame Angèle,
and executed a series of cancan steps, which, though they were so
inimitably droll that they had each and all to be encored, were such
that not one of them need have brought the blush of shame to the cheek
of modesty.

Then the Laird danced a sword-dance over two T squares and broke them
both. And Taffy, baring his mighty arms to the admiring gaze of all, did
dumb-bell exercises, with Little Billee for a dumb-bell, and all but
dropped him into the punch-bowl; and tried to cut a pewter ladle in two
with Dodor's sabre, and sent it through the window; and this made him
cross, so that he abused French sabres, and said they were made of worse
pewter than even French ladles; and the Laird sententiously opined that
they managed these things better in England, and winked at Little
Billee.

Then they played at "cock-fighting," with their wrists tied across their
shins, and a broomstick thrust in between; thus manacled, you are placed
opposite your antagonist, and try to upset him with your feet, and he
you. It is a very good game. The cuirassier and the Zouave playing at
this got so angry, and were so irresistibly funny a sight, that the
shouts of laughter could be heard on the other side of the river, so
that a sergent de ville came in and civilly requested them not to make
so much noise. They were disturbing the whole quartier, he said, and
there was quite a "rassemblement" outside. So they made him tipsy, and
also another policeman, who came to look after his comrade, and yet
another; and these guardians of the peace of Paris were trussed and made
to play at cock-fighting, and were still funnier than the two soldiers,
and laughed louder and made more noise than any one else, so that Madame
Vinard had to remonstrate with them; till they got too tipsy to speak,
and fell fast asleep, and were laid next to each other behind the
stove.

The _fin de siècle_ reader, disgusted at the thought of such an orgy as
I have been trying to describe, must remember that it happened in the
fifties, when men calling themselves gentlemen, and being called so,
still wrenched off door-knockers and came back drunk from the Derby, and
even drank too much after dinner before joining the ladies, as is all
duly chronicled and set down in John Leech's immortal pictures of life
and character out of _Punch_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then M. and Mme. Vinard and Trilby and Angèle Boisse bade the company
good-night, Trilby being the last of them to leave.

Little Billee took her to the top of the staircase, and there he said to
her:

"Trilby, I have asked you nineteen times, and you have refused. Trilby,
once more, on Christmas night, for the twentieth time--_will_ you marry
me? If not, I leave Paris to-morrow morning, and never come back. I
swear it on my word of honor!"

Trilby turned very pale, and leaned her back against the wall, and
covered her face with her hands.

Little Billee pulled them away.

"Answer me, Trilby!"

"God forgive me, _yes!_" said Trilby, and she ran down-stairs, weeping.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was now very late.

It soon became evident that Little Billee was in extraordinary high
spirits--in an abnormal state of excitement.

He challenged Svengali to spar, and made his nose bleed, and frightened
him out of his sardonic wits. He performed wonderful and quite
unsuspected feats of strength. He swore eternal friendship to Dodor and
Zouzou, and filled their glasses again and again, and also (in his
innocence) his own, and trinquéd with them many times running. They were
the last to leave (except the three helpless policemen); and at about
five or six in the morning, to his surprise, he found himself walking
between Dodor and Zouzou by a late windy moonlight in the Rue Vieille
des Mauvais Ladres, now on one side of the frozen gutter, now on the
other, now in the middle of it, stopping them now and then to tell them
how jolly they were and how dearly he loved them.

Presently his hat flew away, and went rolling and skipping and bounding
up the narrow street, and they discovered that as soon as they let each
other go to run after it, they all three sat down.

So Dodor and Little Billee remained sitting, with their arms round each
other's necks and their feet in the gutter, while Zouzou went after the
hat on all fours, and caught it, and brought it back in his mouth like a
tipsy retriever. Little Billee wept for sheer love and gratitude, and
called him a cary_hat_ide (in English), and laughed loudly at his own
wit, which was quite thrown away on Zouzou! "No man ever _had_ such
dear, dear frenge! no man ever _was_ s'happy!"

After sitting for a while in love and amity, they managed to get up on
their feet again, each helping the other; and in some never-to-be-remembered
way they reached the Hôtel Corneille.

[Illustration: "'ANSWER ME, TRILBY!'"]

There they sat little Billee on the door-step and rang the bell, and
seeing some one coming up the Place de l'Odéon, and fearing he might be
a sergent de ville, they bid Little Billee a most affectionate but hasty
farewell, kissing him on both cheeks in French fashion, and contriving
to get themselves round the corner and out of sight.

Little Billee tried to sing Zouzou's drinking-song:

                  "Quoi de plus doux
                   Que les glougloux--
    Les glougloux du vin à quat' sous...."

The stranger came up. Fortunately, it was no sergent de ville, but
Ribot, just back from a Christmas-tree and a little family dance at his
aunt's, Madame Kolb (the Alsacian banker's wife, in the Rue de la
Chaussée d'Antin).

[Illustration: A CARY_HAT_IDE]

Next morning poor Little Billee was dreadfully ill.

He had passed a terrible night. His bed had heaved like the ocean, with
oceanic results. He had forgotten to put out his candle, but fortunately
Ribot had blown it out for him, after putting him to bed and tucking him
up like a real good Samaritan.

And next morning, when Madame Paul brought him a cup of tisane de
chiendent (which does not happen to mean a hair of the dog that bit
him), she was kind, but very severe on the dangers and disgrace of
intoxication, and talked to him like a mother.

"If it had not been for kind Monsieur Ribot" (she told him), "the
door-step would have been your portion; and who could say you didn't
deserve it? And then think of the dangers of fire from a tipsy man all
alone in a small bedroom with chintz curtains and a lighted candle!"

"Ribot was kind enough to blow out my candle," said Little Billee,
humbly.

"Ah, Dame!" said Madame Paul, with much meaning--"au moins il a _bon
cœur_, Monsieur Ribot!"

And the crulest sting of all was when the good-natured and incorrigibly
festive Ribot came and sat by his bedside, and was kind and tenderly
sympathetic, and got him a pick-me-up from the chemist's (unbeknown to
Madame Paul).

"Credieu! vous vous êtes crânement bien amusé, hier soir! quelle bosse,
hein! je parie que c'était plus drôle que chez ma tante Kolb!"

All of which, of course, it is unnecessary to translate; except,
perhaps, the word "bosse," which stands for "noce," which stands for a
"jolly good spree."

In all his innocent little life Little Billee had never dreamed of such
humiliation as this--such ignominious depths of shame and misery and
remorse! He did not care to live. He had but one longing: that Trilby,
dear Trilby, kind Trilby, would come and pillow his head on her
beautiful white English bosom, and lay her soft, cool, tender hand on
his aching brow, and there let him go to sleep, and sleeping, die!

He slept and slept, with no better rest for his aching brow than the
pillow of his bed in the Hôtel Corneille, and failed to die this time.
And when, after some forty-eight hours or so, he had quite slept off the
fumes of that memorable Christmas debauch, he found that a sad thing had
happened to him, and a strange!

It was as though a tarnishing breath had swept over the reminiscent
mirror of his mind and left a little film behind it, so that no past
thing he wished to see therein was reflected with quite the old pristine
clearness. As though the keen, quick, razorlike edge of his power to
reach and re-evoke the by-gone charm and glamour and essence of things
had been blunted and coarsened. As though the bloom of that special joy,
the gift he unconsciously had of recalling past emotions and sensations
and situations, and making them actual once more by a mere effort of the
will, had been brushed away.

And he never recovered the full use of that most precious faculty, the
boon of youth and happy childhood, and which he had once possessed,
without knowing it, in such singular and exceptional completeness. He
was to lose other precious faculties of his over-rich and complex
nature--to be pruned and clipped and thinned--that his one supreme
faculty of painting might have elbow-room to reach its fullest, or else
you would never have seen the wood for the trees (or _vice versa_--which
is it?).

[Illustration: "'LES GLOUGLOUX DU VIN À QUAT' SOUS....'"]

On New-year's Day Taffy and the Laird were at their work in the studio,
when there was a knock at the door, and Monsieur Vinard, cap in hand,
respectfully introduced a pair of visitors, an English lady and
gentleman.

The gentleman was a clergyman, small, thin, round-shouldered, with a
long neck; weak-eyed and dryly polite. The lady was middle-aged, though
still young looking; very pretty, with gray hair; very well dressed;
very small, full of nervous energy, with tiny hands and feet. It was
Little Billee's mother; and the clergyman, the Rev. Thomas Bagot, was
her brother-in-law.

Their faces were full of trouble--so much so that the two painters did
not even apologize for the carelessness of their attire, or for the odor
of tobacco that filled the room. Little Billee's mother recognized the
two painters at a glance, from the sketches and descriptions of which
her son's letters were always full.

They all sat down.

After a moment's embarrassed silence, Mrs. Bagot exclaimed, addressing
Taffy: "Mr. Wynne, we are in terrible distress of mind. I don't know if
my son has told you, but on Christmas Day he engaged himself to be
married!"

"To--be--_married!_" exclaimed Taffy and the Laird, for whom this was
news indeed.

"Yes--to be married to a Miss Trilby O'Ferrall, who, from what he
implies, is in quite a different position in life to himself. Do you
know the lady, Mr. Wynne?"

"Oh yes! I know her very well indeed; we _all_ know her."

"Is she English?"

"She's an English subject, I believe."

"Is she a Protestant or a Roman Catholic?" inquired the clergyman.

"A--a--upon my word, I really don't know!"

"You know her very well indeed, and you _don't_--_know_--_that_, Mr.
Wynne!" exclaimed Mr. Bagot.

"Is she a _lady_, Mr. Wynne?" asked Mrs. Bagot, somewhat impatiently, as
if that were a much more important matter.

By this time the Laird had managed to basely desert his friend; had got
himself into his bedroom, and from thence, by another door, into the
street and away.

"A lady?" said Taffy; "a--it so much depends upon what that word exactly
means, you know; things are so--a--so different here. Her father was a
gentleman, I believe--a fellow of Trinity, Cambridge--and a clergyman,
if _that_ means anything!... he was unfortunate and all
that--a--intemperate, I fear, and not successful in life. He has been
dead six or seven years."

"And her mother?"

"I really know very little about her mother, except that she was very
handsome, I believe, and of inferior social rank to her husband. She's
also dead; she died soon after him."

"What is the young lady, then? An English governess, or something of
that sort?"

"Oh, no, no--a--nothing of _that_ sort," said Taffy (and inwardly, "You
coward--you cad of a Scotch thief of a sneak of a Laird--to leave all
this to me!").

"What? Has she independent means of her own, then?"

"A--not that I know of; I should even say, decidedly not!"

"What _is_ she, then? She's at least respectable, I hope!"

"At present she's a--a blanchisseuse de fin--that is considered
respectable here."

"Why, that's a washer-woman, isn't it?"

"Well--rather better than that, perhaps--_de fin_, you know!--things are
so different in Paris! I don't think you'd say she was very much like a
washer-woman--to look at!"

"Is she so good-looking, then?"

"Oh yes; extremely so. You may well say that--very beautiful,
indeed--about that, at least, there is no doubt whatever!"

"And of unblemished character?"

Taffy, red and perspiring as if he were going through his Indian-club
exercise, was silent--and his face expressed a miserable perplexity. But
nothing could equal the anxious misery of those two maternal eyes, so
wistfully fixed on his.

After some seconds of a most painful stillness, the lady said, "Can't
you--oh, _can't_ you give me an answer, Mr. Wynne?"

"Oh, Mrs. Bagot, you have placed me in a terrible position! I--I love
your son just as if he were my own brother! This engagement is a
complete surprise to me--a most painful surprise! I'd thought of many
possible things, but never of _that!_ I cannot--I really _must_ not
conceal from you that it would be an unfortunate marriage for your
son--from a--a worldly point of view, you know--although both I and
McAllister have a very deep and warm regard for poor Trilby
O'Ferrall--indeed, a great admiration and affection and respect! She
was once a model."

"A _model_, Mr. Wynne? What _sort_ of a model--there are models and
models, of course."

[Illustration: "'IS SHE A _LADY_, MR. WYNNE?'"]

"Well, a model of every sort, in every possible sense of the word--head,
hands, feet, everything!"

"A model for the _figure?_"

"Well--yes!"

"Oh, my God! my God! my God!" cried Mrs. Bagot--and she got up and
walked up and down the studio in a most terrible state of agitation,
her brother-in-law following her and begging her to control herself. Her
exclamations seemed to shock him, and she didn't seem to care.

"Oh, Mr. Wynne! Mr. Wynne! If you only _knew_ what my son is to me--to
all of us--always has been! He has been with us all his life, till he
came to this wicked, accursed city! My poor husband would never hear of
his going to any school, for fear of all the harm he might learn there.
My son was as innocent and pure-minded as any girl, Mr. Wynne--I could
have trusted him anywhere--and that's why I gave way and allowed him to
come _here_, of all places in the world--all alone. Oh! I should have
come with him! Fool--fool--fool that I was!...

"Oh, Mr. Wynne, he won't see either his mother or his uncle! I found a
letter from him at the hotel, saying he'd left Paris--and I don't even
know where he's gone!... Can't _you_, can't Mr. McAllister, do
_anything_ to avert this miserable disaster? You don't know how he loves
you both--you should see his letters to me and to his sister! they are
always full of you!"

"Indeed, Mrs. Bagot--you can count on McAllister and me for doing
everything in our power! But it is of no use our trying to influence
your son--I feel quite sure of _that_! It is to _her_ we must make our
appeal."

"Oh, Mr. Wynne! to a washer-woman--a figure model--and Heaven knows what
besides! and with such a chance as this!"

"Mrs. Bagot, you don't know her? She may have been all that. But
strange as it may seem to you--and seems to me, for that matter--she's
a--she's--upon my word of honor, I really think she's about the best
woman I ever met--the most unselfish--the most--"

"Ah! She's a _beautiful_ woman--I can well see _that!_"

"She has a beautiful nature, Mrs. Bagot--you may believe me or not, as
you like--and it is to that I shall make my appeal, as your son's
friend, who has his interests at heart. And let me tell you that deeply
as I grieve for you in your present distress, my grief and concern for
her are far greater!"

"What! grief for her if she marries my son!"

"No, indeed--but if she refuses to marry him. She may not do so, of
course--but my instinct tells me she will!"

"Oh! Mr. Wynne, is that likely?"

"I will do my best to make it so--with such an utter trust in her
unselfish goodness of heart and her passionate affection for your son
as--"

"How do you know she has all this passionate affection for him?"

"Oh, McAllister and I have long guessed it--though we never thought this
particular thing would come of it. I think, perhaps, that first of all
you ought to see her yourself--you would get quite a new idea of what
she really is--you would be surprised, I assure you."

Mrs. Bagot shrugged her shoulders impatiently, and there was silence for
a minute or two.

And then, just as in a play, Trilby's "Milk below!" was sounded at the
door, and Trilby came into the little antechamber, and seeing
strangers, was about to turn back. She was dressed as a grisette, in her
Sunday gown and pretty white cap (for it was New-year's Day), and
looking her very best.

Taffy called out, "Come in, Trilby!"

And Trilby came into the studio.

As soon as she saw Mrs. Bagot's face she stopped short--erect, her
shoulders a little high, her mouth a little open, her eyes wide with
fright--and pale to the lips--a pathetic, yet commanding, magnificent,
and most distinguished apparition, in spite of her humble attire.

The little lady got up and walked straight to her, and looked up into
her face, that seemed to tower so. Trilby breathed hard.

At length Mrs. Bagot said, in her high accents, "You are Miss Trilby
O'Ferrall?"

"Oh yes--yes--I am Trilby O'Ferrall, and you are Mrs. Bagot; I can see
that!"

A new tone had come into her large, deep, soft voice, so tragic, so
touching, so strangely in accord with the whole aspect just then--so
strangely in accord with the whole situation--that Taffy felt his cheeks
and lips turn cold, and his big spine thrill and tickle all down his
back.

"Oh yes; you are very, very beautiful--there's no doubt about _that_!
You wish to marry my son?"

"I've refused to marry him nineteen times for his own sake; he will tell
you so himself. I am not the right person for him to marry. I know that.
On Christmas night he asked me for the twentieth time; he swore he would
leave Paris next day forever if I refused him. I hadn't the courage. I
was weak, you see! It was a dreadful mistake."

"Are you so fond of him?"

"_Fond_ of him? Aren't _you_?"

"I'm his mother, my good girl!"

To this Trilby seemed to have nothing to say.

"You have just said yourself you are not a fit wife for him. If you are
so _fond_ of him, will you ruin him by marrying him; drag him down;
prevent him from getting on in life; separate him from his sister, his
family, his friends?"

[Illustration: "'_FOND_ OF HIM? AREN'T _YOU_?'"]

Trilby turned her miserable eyes to Taffy's miserable face, and said,
"Will it really be all that, Taffy?"

"Oh, Trilby, things have got all wrong, and can't be righted! I'm afraid
it might be so. Dear Trilby--I can't tell you what I feel--but I can't
tell you lies, you know!"

"Oh no--Taffy--you don't tell lies!"

Then Trilby began to tremble very much, and Taffy tried to make her sit
down, but she wouldn't. Mrs. Bagot looked up into her face, herself
breathless with keen suspense and cruel anxiety--almost imploring.

Trilby looked down at Mrs. Bagot very kindly, put out her shaking hand,
and said; "Good-bye, Mrs. Bagot. I will not marry your son. I _promise_
you. I will never see him again."

Mrs. Bagot caught and clasped her hand and tried to kiss it, and said:
"Don't go yet, my dear good girl. I want to talk to you. I want to tell
you how deeply I--"

"Good-bye, Mrs. Bagot," said Trilby, once more; and, disengaging her
hand, she walked swiftly out of the room.

Mrs. Bagot seemed stupefied, and only half content with her quick
triumph.

"She will not marry your son, Mrs. Bagot. I only wish to God she'd marry
_me_!"

"Oh, Mr. Wynne!" said Mrs. Bagot, and burst into tears.

"Ah!" exclaimed the clergyman, with a feebly satirical smile and a
little cough and sniff that were not sympathetic, "now if _that_ could
be arranged--and I've no doubt there wouldn't be much opposition on the
part of the lady" (here he made a little complimentary bow), "it would
be a very desirable thing all round!"

"It's tremendously good of you, I'm sure--to interest yourself in _my_
humble affairs," said Taffy. "Look here, sir--I'm not a great genius
like your nephew--and it doesn't much matter to any one but myself what
I make of my life--but I can assure you that if Trilby's heart were set
on me as it is on him, I would gladly cast in my lot with hers for life.
She's one in a thousand. She's the one sinner that repenteth, you know!"

"Ah, yes--to be sure!--to be sure! I know all about that; still, facts
are facts, and the world is the world, and we've got to live in it,"
said Mr. Bagot, whose satirical smile had died away under the gleam of
Taffy's choleric blue eye.

Then said the good Taffy, frowning down on the parson (who looked mean
and foolish, as people can sometimes do even with right on their side):
"And now, Mr. Bagot--I can't tell you how very keenly I have suffered
during this--a--this most painful interview--on account of my very deep
regard for Trilby O'Ferrall. I congratulate you and your sister-in-law
on its complete success. I also feel very deeply for your nephew. I'm
not sure that he has not lost more than he will gain by--a--by
the--a--the success of this--a--this interview, in short!"

Taffy's eloquence was exhausted, and his quick temper was getting the
better of him.

Then Mrs. Bagot, drying her eyes, came and took his hand in a very
charming and simple manner, and said: "Mr. Wynne, I think I know what
you are feeling just now. You must try and make some allowance for us.
You will, I am sure, when we are gone, and you have had time to think a
little. As for that noble and beautiful girl, I only wish that she were
such that my son _could_ marry her--in her past life, I mean. It is not
her humble rank that would frighten me; _pray_ believe that I am quite
sincere in this--and don't think too hardly of your friend's mother.
Think of all I shall have to go through with my poor son--who is deeply
in love--and no wonder! and who has won the love of such a woman as
that! and who cannot see at present how fatal to him such a marriage
would be. I can see all the charm and believe in all the goodness, in
spite of all. And, oh, how beautiful she is, and what a voice! All that
counts for so much, doesn't it? I cannot tell you how I grieve for her.
I can make no amends--who could, for such a thing? There are no amends,
and I shall not even try. I will only write and tell her all I think and
feel. You will forgive us, won't you?"

And in the quick, impulsive warmth and grace and sincerity of her manner
as she said all this, Mrs. Bagot was so absurdly like Little Billee that
it touched big Taffy's heart, and he would have forgiven anything, and
there was nothing to forgive.

"Oh, Mrs. Bagot, there's no question of forgiveness. Good heavens! it is
all so unfortunate, you know! Nobody's to blame that I can see.
Good-bye, Mrs. Bagot; good-bye, sir," and so saying, he saw them down to
their "remise," in which sat a singularly pretty young lady of seventeen
or so, pale and anxious, and so like Little Billee that it was quite
funny, and touched big Taffy's heart again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Trilby went out into the court-yard in the Place St. Anatole des
Arts, she saw Miss Bagot looking out of the carriage window, and in the
young lady's face, as she caught her eye, an expression of sweet
surprise and sympathetic admiration, with lifted eyebrows and parted
lips--just such a look as she had often got from Little Billee! She knew
her for his sister at once. It was a sharp pang.

[Illustration: "SO LIKE LITTLE BILLEE"]

She turned away, saying to herself: "Oh no; I will not separate him from
his sister, his family, his friends! That would _never_ do! _That's_
settled, anyhow!"

Feeling a little dazed, and wishing to think, she turned up the Rue
Vieille des Mauvais Ladres, which was always deserted at this hour. It
was empty but for a solitary figure sitting on a post, with its legs
dangling, its hands in its trousers-pockets, an inverted pipe in its
mouth, a tattered straw hat on the back of its head, and a long gray
coat down to its heels. It was the Laird.

As soon as he saw her he jumped off his post and came to her, saying:
"Oh, Trilby--what's it all about? I couldn't stand it! I ran away!
Little Billee's mother's there!"

"Yes, Sandy dear, I've just seen her."

"Well, what's up?"

"I've promised her never to see Little Billee any more. I was foolish
enough to promise to marry him. I refused many times these last three
months, and then he said he'd leave Paris and never come back, and so,
like a fool, I gave way. I've offered to live with him and take care of
him and be his servant--to be everything he wished but his wife! But he
wouldn't hear of it. Dear, dear Little Billee! he's an angel--and I'll
take precious good care no harm shall ever come to him through me! I
shall leave this hateful place and go and live in the country: I suppose
I must manage to get through life somehow. I know of some poor people
who were once very fond of me, and I could live with them and help them
and keep myself. The difficulty is about Jeannot. I thought it all out
before it came to this. I was well prepared, you see."

She smiled in a forlorn sort of way, with her upper lip drawn tight
against her teeth, as if some one were pulling her back by the lobes of
her ears.

"Oh! but Trilby--what shall we do without you? Taffy and I, you know!
You've become one of us!"

"Now how good and kind of you to say that!" exclaimed poor Trilby, her
eyes filling. "Why, that's just all I lived for, till all this happened.
But it can't be any more now, can it? Everything is changed for me--the
very sky seems different. Ah! Durien's little song--'_Plaisir
d'amour--chagrin d'amour_!' it's all quite true, isn't it? I shall start
immediately, and take Jeannot with me, I think."

"But where do you think of going?"

"Ah! I mayn't tell you that, Sandy dear--not for a long time! Think of
all the trouble there'd be-- Well, there's no time to be lost. I must
take the bull by the horns."

She tried to laugh, and took him by his big side-whiskers and kissed him
on the eyes and mouth, and her tears fell on his face.

Then, feeling unable to speak, she nodded farewell, and walked quickly
up the narrow winding street. When she came to the first bend she turned
round and waved her hand, and kissed it two or three times, and then
disappeared.

The Laird stared for several minutes up the empty
thoroughfare--wretched, full of sorrow and compassion. Then he filled
himself another pipe and lit it, and hitched himself on to another post,
and sat there dangling his legs and kicking his heels, and waited for
the Bagots' cab to depart, that he might go up and face the righteous
wrath of Taffy like a man, and bear up against his bitter reproaches for
cowardice and desertion before the foe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning Taffy received two letters: one, a very long one, was from
Mrs. Bagot. He read it twice over, and was forced to acknowledge that it
was a very good letter--the letter of a clever, warm-hearted woman, but
a woman also whose son was to her as the very apple of her eye. One felt
she was ready to flay her dearest friend alive in order to make Little
Billee a pair of gloves out of the skin, if he wanted a pair; but one
also felt she would be genuinely sorry for the friend. Taffy's own
mother had been a little like that, and he missed her every day of his
life.

Full justice was done by Mrs. Bagot to all Trilby's qualities of head
and heart and person; but at the same time she pointed out, with all the
cunning and ingeniously casuistic logic of her sex, when it takes to
special pleading (even when it has right on its side), what the
consequences of such a marriage must inevitably be in a few years--even
sooner! The quick disenchantment, the life-long regret, on both sides!

He could not have found a word to controvert her arguments, save perhaps
in his own private belief that Trilby and Little Billee were both
exceptional people; and how could he hope to know Little Billee's nature
better than the boy's own mother!

And if he had been the boy's elder brother in blood, as he already was
in art and affection, would he, should he, could he have given his
fraternal sanction to such a match?

Both as his friend and his brother he felt it was out of the question.

The other letter was from Trilby, in her bold, careless handwriting,
that sprawled all over the page, and her occasionally imperfect
spelling. It ran thus:

[Illustration: "'I MUST TAKE THE BULL BY THE HORNS'"]

     "MY DEAR, DEAR TAFFY,--This is to say good-bye. I'm going away, to
     put an end to all this misery, for which nobody's to blame but
     myself.

     "The very moment after I'd said _yes_ to Little Billee I knew
     perfectly well what a stupid fool I was, and I've been ashamed of
     myself ever since. I had a miserable week, I can tell you. I knew
     how it would all turn out.

     "I am dreadfully unhappy, but not half so unhappy as if I married
     him and he were ever to regret it and be ashamed of me; and of
     course he would, really, even if he didn't show it--good and kind
     as he is--an angel!

     "Besides--of course I could never be a lady--how could I?--though I
     ought to have been one, I suppose. But everything seems to have
     gone wrong with me, though I never found it out before--and it
     can't be righted!

     "Poor papa!

     "I am going away with Jeannot. I've been neglecting him shamefully.
     I mean to make up for it all now.

     "You mustn't try and find out where I am going; I know you won't if
     I beg you, nor any one else. It would make everything so much
     harder for me.

     "Angèle knows; she has promised me not to tell. I should like to
     have a line from you very much. If you send it to her she will send
     it on to me.

     "Dear Taffy, next to Little Billee, I love you and the Laird better
     than any one else in the whole world. I've never known real
     happiness till I met you. You have changed me into another
     person--you and Sandy and Little Billee.

     "Oh, it _has_ been a jolly time, though it didn't last long. It
     will have to do for me for life. So good-bye. I shall never, never
     forget; and remain, with dearest love,

     "Your ever faithful and most affectionate friend,

     "TRILBY O'FERRALL.

     "P.S.--When it has all blown over and settled again, if it ever
     does, I shall come back to Paris, perhaps, and see you again some
     day."

The good Taffy pondered deeply over this letter--read it half a dozen
times at least; and then he kissed it, and put it back into its envelope
and locked it up.

He knew what very deep anguish underlay this somewhat trivial expression
of her sorrow.

He guessed how Trilby, so childishly impulsive and demonstrative in the
ordinary intercourse of friendship, would be more reticent than most
women in such a case as this.

He wrote to her warmly, affectionately, at great length, and sent the
letter as she had told him.

The Laird also wrote a long letter full of tenderly worded friendship
and sincere regard. Both expressed their hope and belief that they would
soon see her again, when the first bitterness of her grief would be
over, and that the old pleasant relations would be renewed.

And then, feeling wretched, they went and silently lunched together at
the Café de l'Odéon, where the omelets were good and the wine wasn't
blue.

Late that evening they sat together in the studio, reading. They found
they could not talk to each other very readily without Little Billee to
listen--three's company sometimes and two's none!

Suddenly there was a tremendous getting up the dark stairs outside in a
violent hurry, and Little Billee burst into the room like a small
whirlwind--haggard, out of breath, almost speechless at first with
excitement.

"Trilby? where is she?... what's become of her?... She's run away ...
oh! She's written me such a letter!... We were to have been married ...
at the Embassy ... my mother ... she's been meddling; and that cursed
old ass ... that beast ... my uncle!... They've been here! I know all
about it.... Why didn't you stick up for her?..."

"I did ... as well as I could. Sandy couldn't stand it, and cut."

"_You_ stuck up for her ... _you_--why, you agreed with my mother that
she oughtn't to marry me--you--you false friend--you.... Why, she's an
angel--far too good for the likes of _me_ ... you know she is. As ... as
for her social position and all that, what degrading rot! Her father was
as much a gentleman as mine ... besides ... what the devil do I care for
her father?... it's _her_ I want--_her_--_her_--_her_, I tell you.... I
can't _live_ without her.... I must have her _back_--I must have her
_back_ ... do you _hear_? We were to have lived together at Barbizon ...
all our lives--and I was to have painted stunning pictures ... like
those other fellows there. Who cares for _their_ social position, I
should like to know ... or that of their wives? _Damn_ social
position!... we've often said so--over and over again. An artist's life
should be _away_ from the world--above all that meanness and paltriness
... all in his work. Social position, indeed! Over and over again we've
said what fetid, bestial rot it all was--a thing to make one sick and
shut one's self away from the world.... Why say one thing and act
another?... Love comes before all--love levels all--love and art ... and
beauty--before such beauty as Trilby's rank doesn't exist. Such rank as
mine, too! Good God! I'll never paint another stroke till I've got her
back ... never, never, I tell you--I can't--I won't!..."

[Illustration: "'TRILBY! WHERE IS SHE?'"]

And so the poor boy went on, tearing and raving about in his rampage,
knocking over chairs and easels, stammering and shrieking, mad with
excitement.

They tried to reason with him, to make him listen, to point out that it
was not her social position alone that unfitted her to be his wife and
the mother of his children, etc.

It was no good. He grew more and more uncontrollable, became almost
unintelligible, he stammered so--a pitiable sight and pitiable to hear.

"Oh! oh! good heavens! are you so precious immaculate, you two, that you
should throw stones at poor Trilby! What a shame, what a hideous shame
it is that there should be one law for the woman and another for the
man!... poor weak women--poor, soft, affectionate things that beasts of
men are always running after and pestering and ruining and trampling
underfoot.... Oh! oh! it makes me sick--it makes me sick!" And finally
he gasped and screamed and fell down in a fit on the floor.

The doctor was sent for; Taffy went in a cab to the Hôtel de Lille et
d'Albion to fetch his mother; and poor Little Billee, quite unconscious,
was undressed by Sandy and Madame Vinard and put into the Laird's bed.

The doctor came, and not long after Mrs. Bagot and her daughter. It was
a serious case. Another doctor was called in. Beds were got and made up
in the studio for the two grief-stricken ladies, and thus closed the eve
of what was to have been poor Little Billee's wedding-day, it seems.

Little Billee's attack appears to have been a kind of epileptic seizure.
It ended in brain-fever and other complications--a long and tedious
illness. It was many weeks before he was out of danger, and his
convalescence was long and tedious too.

His nature seemed changed. He lay languid and listless--never even
mentioned Trilby, except once to ask if she had come back, and if any
one knew where she was, and if she had been written to.

She had not, it appears. Mrs. Bagot had thought it was better not, and
Taffy and the Laird agreed with her that no good could come of writing.

Mrs. Bagot felt bitterly against the woman who had been the cause of all
this trouble, and bitterly against herself for her injustice. It was an
unhappy time for everybody.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was more unhappiness still to come.

One day in February Madame Angèle Boisse called on Taffy and the Laird
in the temporary studio where they worked. She was in terrible
tribulation.

[Illustration: LA SŒUR DE LITREBILI]

Trilby's little brother had died of scarlet-fever and was buried, and
Trilby had left her hiding-place the day after the funeral and had never
come back, and this was a week ago. She and Jeannot had been living at a
village called Vibraye, in la Sarthe, lodging with some poor people she
knew--she washing and working with her needle till her brother fell ill.

She had never left his bedside for a moment, night or day, and when he
died her grief was so terrible that people thought she would go out of
her mind; and the day after he was buried she was not to be found
anywhere--she had disappeared, taking nothing with her, not even her
clothes--simply vanished and left no sign, no message of any kind.

All the ponds had been searched--all the wells, and the small stream
that flows through Vibraye--and the old forest.

Taffy went to Vibraye, cross-examined everybody he could, communicated
with the Paris police, but with no result, and every afternoon, with a
beating heart, he went to the Morgue....

       *       *       *       *       *

The news was of course kept from Little Billee. There was no difficulty
about this. He never asked a question, hardly ever spoke.

When he first got up and was carried into the studio he asked for his
picture "The Pitcher Goes to the Well," and looked at it for a while,
and then shrugged his shoulders and laughed--a miserable sort of laugh,
painful to hear--the laugh of a cold old man, who laughs so as not to
cry! Then he looked at his mother and sister, and saw the sad havoc that
grief and anxiety had wrought in them.

It seemed to him, as in a bad dream, that he had been mad for many
years--a cause of endless sickening terror and distress; and that his
poor weak wandering wits had come back at last, bringing in their train
cruel remorse, and the remembrance of all the patient love and kindness
that had been lavished on him for many years! His sweet sister--his
dear, long-suffering mother! what had really happened to make them look
like this?

And taking them both in his feeble arms, he fell a-weeping, quite
desperately and for a long time.

And when his weeping-fit was over, when he had quite wept himself out,
he fell asleep.

[Illustration: "HE FELL A-WEEPING, QUITE DESPERATELY"]

And when he awoke he was conscious that another sad thing had happened
to him, and that for some mysterious cause his power of loving had not
come back with his wandering wits--had been left behind--and it seemed
to him that it was gone for ever and ever--would never come back
again--not even his love for his mother and sister, not even his love
for Trilby--where all _that_ had once been was a void, a gap, a
blankness....

Truly, if Trilby had suffered much, she had also been the innocent cause
of terrible suffering. Poor Mrs. Bagot, in her heart, could not forgive
her.

I feel this is getting to be quite a sad story, and that it is high time
to cut this part of it short.

As the warmer weather came, and Little Billee got stronger, the studio
became more pleasant. The ladies' beds were removed to another studio on
the next landing, which was vacant, and the friends came to see Little
Billee, and make it more lively for him and his sister.

As for Taffy and the Laird, they had already long been to Mrs. Bagot as
a pair of crutches, without whose invaluable help she could never have
held herself upright to pick her way in all this maze of trouble.

Then M. Carrel came every day to chat with his favorite pupil and
gladden Mrs. Bagot's heart. And also Durien, Carnegie, Petrolicoconose,
Vincent, Antony, Lorrimer, Dodor, and l'Zouzou; Mrs. Bagot thought the
last two irresistible, when she had once been satisfied that they were
"gentlemen," in spite of appearances. And, indeed, they showed
themselves to great advantage; and though they were so much the opposite
to Little Billee in everything, she felt almost maternal towards them,
and gave them innocent, good, motherly advice, which they swallowed
_avec attendrissement_, not even stealing a look at each other. And they
held Mrs. Bagot's wool, and listened to Miss Bagot's sacred music with
upturned pious eyes, and mealy mouths that butter wouldn't melt in!

It is good to be a soldier and a detrimental; you touch the hearts of
women and charm them--old and young, high or low (excepting, perhaps, a
few worldly mothers of marriageable daughters). They take the sticking
of your tongue in the cheek for the wearing of your heart on the sleeve.

Indeed, good women all over the world, and ever since it began, have
loved to be bamboozled by these genial, roistering dare-devils, who
haven't got a penny to bless themselves with (which is so touching), and
are supposed to carry their lives in their hands, even in piping times
of peace. Nay, even a few rare _bad_ women sometimes, such women as the
best and wisest of us are often ready to sell our souls for!

    "A lightsome eye, a soldier's mien,
       A feather of the blue,
     A doublet of the Lincoln green--
       No more of me you knew,
             My love!
       No more of me you knew...."

As if that wasn't enough, and to spare!

Little Billee could hardly realize that these two polite and gentle and
sympathetic sons of Mars were the lively grigs who had made themselves
so pleasant all round, and in such a singular manner, on the top of that
St. Cloud omnibus; and he admired how they added hypocrisy to their
other crimes!

Svengali had gone back to Germany, it seemed, with his pockets full of
napoleons and big Havana cigars, and wrapped in an immense fur-lined
coat, which he meant to wear all through the summer. But little Gecko
often came with his violin and made lovely music, and that seemed to do
Little Billee more good than anything else.

It made him realize in his brain all the love he could no longer feel in
his heart. The sweet melodic phrase, rendered by a master, was as
wholesome, refreshing balm to him while it lasted--or as manna in the
wilderness. It was the one good thing within his reach, never to be
taken from him as long as his ear-drums remained and he could hear a
master play.

Poor Gecko treated the two English ladies _de bas en haut_ as if they
had been goddesses, even when they accompanied him on the piano! He
begged their pardon for every wrong note they struck, and adopted their
"tempi"--that is the proper technical term, I believe--and turned
scherzos and allegrettos into funeral dirges to please them; and agreed
with them, poor little traitor, that it all sounded much better like
that!

O Beethoven! O Mozart! did you turn in your graves?

Then, on fine afternoons, Little Billee was taken for drives to the Bois
de Boulogne with his mother and sister in an open fly, and generally
Taffy as a fourth; to Passy, Auteuil, Boulogne, St. Cloud, Meudon--there
are many charming places within an easy drive of Paris.

[Illustration: "THE SWEET MELODIC PHRASE"]

And sometimes Taffy or the Laird would escort Mrs. and Miss Bagot to the
Luxembourg Gallery, the Louvre, the Palais Royal--to the Comédie
Française once or twice; and on Sundays, now and then, to the English
chapel in the Rue Marbœuf. It was all very pleasant; and Miss Bagot
looks back on the days of her brother's convalescence as among the
happiest in her life.

And they would all five dine together in the studio, with Madame Vinard
to wait, and her mother (a cordon bleu) for cook; and the whole aspect
of the place was changed and made fragrant, sweet, and charming by all
this new feminine invasion and occupation.

And what is sweeter to watch than the dawn and growth of love's young
dream, when strength and beauty meet together by the couch of a beloved
invalid?

Of course the sympathetic reader will foresee how readily the stalwart
Taffy fell a victim to the charms of his friend's sweet sister, and how
she grew to return his more than brotherly regard! and how, one lovely
evening, just as March was going out like a lamb (to make room for the
first of April), little Billee joined their hands together, and gave
them his brotherly blessing!

As a matter of fact, however, nothing of this kind happened. Nothing
ever happens but the _un_foreseen. Pazienza!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then at length one day--it was a fine, sunny, showery day in April,
by-the-bye, and the big studio window was open at the top and let in a
pleasant breeze from the northwest, just as when our little story
began--a railway omnibus drew up at the porte cochère in the Place St.
Anatole des Arts, and carried away to the station of the Chemin de Fer
du Nord Little Billee and his mother and sister, and all their
belongings (the famous picture had gone before); and Taffy and the Laird
rode with them, their faces very long, to see the last of the dear
people, and of the train that was to bear them away from Paris; and
Little Billee, with his quick, prehensile, æsthetic eye, took many a
long and wistful parting gaze at many a French thing he loved, from the
gray towers of Notre Dame downward--Heaven only knew when he might see
them again!--so he tried to get their aspect well by heart, that he
might have the better store of beloved shape and color memories to chew
the cud of when his lost powers of loving and remembering clearly should
come back, and he lay awake at night and listened to the wash of the
Atlantic along the beautiful red sandstone coast at home.

He had a faint hope that he should feel sorry at parting with Taffy and
the Laird.

But when the time came for saying good-bye he couldn't feel sorry in the
least, for all he tried and strained so hard!

So he thanked them so earnestly and profusely for all their kindness and
patience and sympathy (as did also his mother and sister) that their
hearts were too full to speak, and their manner was quite gruff--it was
a way they had when they were deeply moved and didn't want to show it.

And as he gazed out of the carriage window at their two forlorn figures
looking after him when the train steamed out of the station, his sorrow
at not feeling sorry made him look so haggard and so woe-begone that
they could scarcely bear the sight of him departing without them, and
almost felt as if they must follow by the next train, and go and cheer
him up in Devonshire, and themselves too.

They did not yield to this amiable weakness. Sorrowfully, arm in arm,
with trailing umbrellas, they recrossed the river, and found their way
to the Café de l'Odéon, where they ate many omelets in silence, and
dejectedly drank of the best they could get, and were very sad indeed.

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly five years have elapsed since we bade farewell and _au revoir_ to
Taffy and the Laird at the Paris station of the Chemin de Fer du Nord,
and wished Little Billee and his mother and sister Godspeed on their way
to Devonshire, where the poor sufferer was to rest and lie fallow for a
few months, and recruit his lost strength and energy, that he might
follow up his first and well-deserved success, which perhaps contributed
just a little to his recovery.

Many of my readers will remember his splendid début at the Royal Academy
in Trafalgar Square with that now so famous canvas "The Pitcher Goes to
the Well," and how it was sold three times over on the morning of the
private view, the third time for a thousand pounds--just five times what
he got for it himself. And that was thought a large sum in those days
for a beginner's picture, two feet by four.

[Illustration: "SORROWFULLY, ARM IN ARM"]

I am well aware that such a vulgar test is no criterion whatever of a
picture's real merit. But this picture is well known to all the world by
this time, and sold only last year at Christy's (more than thirty-six
years after it was painted) for three thousand pounds.

Thirty-six years! That goes a long way to redeem even three thousand
pounds of all their cumulative vulgarity.

"The Pitcher" is now in the National Gallery, with that other canvas by
the same hand, "The Moon-Dial." There they hang together for all who
care to see them, his first and his last--the blossom and the fruit.

He had not long to live himself, and it was his good-fortune, so rare
among those whose work is destined to live forever, that he succeeded at
his first go-off.

And his success was of the best and most flattering kind.

It began high up, where it should, among the masters of his own craft.
But his fame filtered quickly down to those immediately beneath, and
through these to wider circles. And there was quite enough of opposition
and vilification and coarse abuse of him to clear it of any suspicion of
cheapness or evanescence. What better antiseptic can there be than the
philistine's deep hate? What sweeter, fresher, wholesomer music than the
sound of his voice when he doth so furiously rage?

Yes! That is "good production." As Svengali would have said, "C'est un
cri du cœur!"

And then, when popular acclaim brings the great dealers and the big
cheques, up rises the printed howl of the duffer, the disappointed one,
the "wounded thing with an angry cry"--the prosperous and happy bagman
that _should_ have been, who has given up all for art, and finds he
can't paint and make himself a name, after all, and never will, so falls
to writing about those who can--and what writing!

To write in hissing dispraise of our more successful fellow-craftsman,
and of those who admire him! that is not a clean or pretty trade. It
seems, alas! an easy one, and it gives pleasure to so many. It does not
even want good grammar. But it pays--well enough even to start and run a
magazine with, instead of scholarship and taste and talent! humor,
sense, wit, and wisdom! It is something like the purveying of
pornographic pictures: some of us look at them and laugh, and even buy.
To be a purchaser is bad enough; but to be the purveyor thereof--ugh!

A poor devil of a cracked soprano (are there such people still?) who has
been turned out of the Pope's choir because he can't sing in tune,
_after all_!--think of him yelling and squeaking his treble rage at
Santley--Sims Reeves--Lablache!

Poor, lost, beardless nondescript! why not fly to other climes, where at
least thou might'st hide from us thy woful crack, and keep thy miserable
secret to thyself! Are there no harems still left in Stamboul for the
likes of thee to sweep and clean, no women's beds to make and slops to
empty, and doors and windows to bar--and tales to carry, and the pasha's
confidence and favor and protection to win? Even _that_ is a better
trade than pandering for hire to the basest instinct of all--the dirty
pleasure we feel (some of us) in seeing mud and dead cats and rotten
eggs flung at those we cannot but admire--and secretly envy!

All of which eloquence means that Little Billee was pitched into right
and left, as well as overpraised. And it all rolled off him like water
off a duck's back, both praise and blame.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a happy summer for Mrs. Bagot, a sweet compensation for all the
anguish of the winter that had gone before, with her two beloved
children together under her wing, and all the world (for her) ringing
with the praise of her boy, the apple of her eye, so providentially
rescued from the very jaws of death, and from other dangers almost as
terrible to her fiercely jealous maternal heart.

And his affection for her _seemed_ to grow with his returning health;
but, alas! he was never again to be quite the same light-hearted,
innocent, expansive lad he had been before that fatal year spent in
Paris.

One chapter of his life was closed, never to be reopened, never to be
spoken of again by him to her, by her to him. She could neither forgive
nor forget. She could but be silent.

Otherwise he was pleasant and sweet to live with, and everything was
done to make his life at home as sweet and pleasant as a loving mother
could--as could a most charming sister--and others' sisters who were
charming too, and much disposed to worship at the shrine of this young
celebrity, who woke up one morning in their little village to find
himself famous, and bore his blushing honors so meekly. And among them
the vicar's daughter, his sister's friend and co-teacher at the
Sunday-school, "a simple, pure, and pious maiden of gentle birth,"
everything he once thought a young lady should be; and her name it was
Alice, and she was sweet, and her hair was brown--as brown!...

And if he no longer found the simple country pleasures, the junketings
and picnics, the garden-parties and innocent little musical evenings,
quite so exciting as of old, he never showed it.

Indeed, there was much that he did not show, and that his mother and
sister tried in vain to guess--many things.

And among them one thing that constantly preoccupied and distressed
him--the numbness of his affections. He could be as easily demonstrative
to his mother and sister as though nothing had ever happened to
him--from the mere force of a sweet old habit--even more so, out of
sheer gratitude and compunction.

But, alas! he felt that in his heart he could no longer care for them in
the least!--nor for Taffy, nor the Laird, nor for himself; not even for
Trilby, of whom he constantly thought, but without emotion; and of whose
strange disappearance he had been told, and the story had been confirmed
in all its details by Angèle Boisse, to whom he had written.

It was as though some part of his brain where his affections were seated
had been paralyzed, while all the rest of it was as keen and as active
as ever. He felt like some poor live bird or beast or reptile, a part
of whose cerebrum (or cerebellum, or whatever it is) had been dug out by
the vivisector for experimental purposes; and the strongest emotional
feeling he seemed capable of was his anxiety and alarm about this
curious symptom, and his concern as to whether he ought to mention it or
not.

He did not do so, for fear of causing distress, hoping that it would
pass away in time, and redoubled his caresses to his mother and sister,
and clung to them more than ever; and became more considerate of others
in manner, word, and deed than he had ever been before, as though by
constantly assuming the virtue he had no longer he would gradually coax
it back again. There was no trouble he would not take to give pleasure
to the humblest.

Also, his vanity about himself had become as nothing, and he missed it
almost as much as his affection.

Yet he told himself over and over again that he was a great artist, and
that he would spare no pains to make himself a greater. But that was no
merit of his own.

2+2=4, also 2×2=4; that peculiarity was no reason why 4 should be
conceited; for what was 4 but a result, either way?

Well, he was like 4--just an inevitable result of circumstances over
which he had no control--a mere product or sum; and though he meant to
make himself as big a 4 as he could (to cultivate his peculiar
_fourness_), he could no longer feel the old conceit and
self-complacency; and they had been a joy, and it was hard to do without
them.

At the bottom of it all was a vague, disquieting unhappiness, a constant
fidget.

And it seemed to him, and much to his distress, that such mild
unhappiness would be the greatest he could ever feel henceforward--but
that, such as it was, it would never leave him, and that his moral
existence would be for evermore one long, gray, gloomy blank--the
glimmer of twilight--never glad, confident morning again!

So much for Little Billee's convalescence.

Then one day in the late autumn he spread his wings and flew away to
London, which was very ready with open arms to welcome William Bagot,
the already famous painter, _alias_ Little Billee!




Part Fifth




LITTLE BILLEE

_An Interlude_

    "Then the mortal coldness of the Soul like death itself comes down;
     It cannot feel for others' woes, it dare not dream its own;
     That heavy chill has frozen o'er the fountain of our tears,
     And, though the eye may sparkle yet, 'tis where the ice appears.

     "Though wit may flash from fluent lips, and mirth distract the breast,
     Through midnight hours that yield no more their former hope of rest:
     'Tis but as ivy leaves around a ruined turret wreathe,
     All green and wildly fresh without, but worn and gray beneath."


When Taffy and the Laird went back to the studio in the Place St.
Anatole des Arts, and resumed their ordinary life there, it was with a
sense of desolation and dull bereavement beyond anything they could have
imagined; and this did not seem to lessen as the time wore on.

They realized for the first time how keen and penetrating and
unintermittent had been the charm of those two central figures--Trilby
and Little Billee--and how hard it was to live without them, after such
intimacy as had been theirs.

"Oh, it _has_ been a jolly time, though it didn't last long!" So Trilby
had written in her farewell letter to Taffy; and these words were true
for Taffy and the Laird as well as for her.

And that is the worst of those dear people who have charm: they are so
terrible to do without, when once you have got accustomed to them and
all their ways.

And when, besides being charming, they are simple, clever, affectionate,
constant, and sincere, like Trilby and Little Billee! Then the
lamentable hole their disappearance makes is not to be filled up! And
when they are full of genius, like Little Billee--and like Trilby, funny
without being vulgar! For so she always seemed to the Laird and Taffy,
even in French (in spite of her Gallic audacities of thought, speech,
and gesture).

All seemed to have suffered change. The very boxing and fencing were
gone through perfunctorily, for mere health's sake; and a thin layer of
adipose deposit began to soften the outlines of the hills and dales on
Taffy's mighty forearm.

Dodor and l'Zouzou no longer came so often, now that the charming Little
Billee and his charming mother and still more charming sister had gone
away--nor Carnegie, nor Antony, nor Lorrimer, nor Vincent, nor the
Greek. Gecko never came at all. Even Svengali was missed, little as he
had been liked. It is a dismal and sulky looking piece of furniture, a
grand-piano that nobody ever plays--with all its sound and its souvenirs
locked up inside--a kind of mausoleum! a lop-sided coffin--trestles and
all!

So it went back to London by the "little quickness," just as it had
come!

Thus Taffy and the Laird grew quite sad and mopy, and lunched at the
Café de l'Odéon every day--till the goodness of the omelets palled, and
the redness of the wine there got on their nerves and into their heads
and faces, and made them sleepy till dinner-time. And then, waking up,
they dressed respectably, and dined expensively, "like gentlemen," in
the Palais Royal, or the Passage Choiseul, or the Passage des
Panoramas--for three francs, three francs fifty, even five francs a
head, and half a franc to the waiter!--and went to the theatre almost
every night, on that side of the water--and more often than not they
took a cab home, each smoking a Panatella, which costs twenty-five
centimes--five sous--2-1/2_d._

Then they feebly drifted into quite decent society--like Lorrimer and
Carnegie--with dress-coats and white ties on, and their hair parted in
the middle and down the back of the head, and brought over the ears in a
bunch at each side, as was the English fashion in those days; and
subscribed to _Galignani's Messenger_; and had themselves proposed and
seconded for the Cercle Anglais in the Rue Sainte-n'y touche, a circle
of British philistines of the very deepest dye; and went to hear divine
service on Sunday mornings in the Rue Marbœuf!

Indeed, by the end of the summer they had sunk into such depths of
demoralization that they felt they must really have a change; and
decided on giving up the studio in the Place St. Anatole des Arts, and
leaving Paris for good; and going to settle for the winter in
Düsseldorf, which is a very pleasant place for English painters who do
not wish to overwork themselves--as the Laird well knew, having spent a
year there.

[Illustration: DEMORALIZATION]

It ended in Taffy's going to Antwerp for the Kermesse, to paint the
Flemish drunkard of our time just as he really is; and the Laird's going
to Spain, so that he might study toreadors from the life.

I may as well state here that the Laird's toreador pictures, which had
had quite a vogue in Scotland as long as he had been content to paint
them in the Place St. Anatole des Arts, quite ceased to please (or sell)
after he had been to Seville and Madrid; so he took to painting Roman
cardinals and Neapolitan pifferari from the depths of his
consciousness--and was so successful that he made up his mind he would
never spoil his market by going to Italy!

So he went and painted his cardinals and his pifferari in Algiers; and
Taffy joined him there, and painted Algerian Jews--just as they really
are (and didn't sell them); and then they spent a year in Munich, and
then a year in Düsseldorf, and a winter in Cairo, and so on.

And all this time Taffy, who took everything _au grand
sérieux_--especially the claims and obligations of
friendship--corresponded regularly with Little Billee, who wrote him
long and amusing letters back again, and had plenty to say about his
life in London--which was a series of triumphs, artistic and social--and
you would have thought from his letters, modest though they were, that
no happier young man, or more elate, was to be found anywhere in the
world.

It was a good time in England, just then, for young artists of promise;
a time of evolution, revolution, change, and development--of the
founding of new schools and the crumbling away of old ones--a keen
struggle for existence--a surviving of the fit--a preparation, let us
hope, for the ultimate survival of the fittest.

And among the many glories of this particular period two names stand out
very conspicuously--for the immediate and (so far) lasting fame their
bearers achieved, and the wide influence they exerted, and continue to
exert still.

The world will not easily forget Frederic Walker and William Bagot,
those two singularly gifted boys, whom it soon became the fashion to
bracket together, to compare and to contrast, as one compares and
contrasts Thackeray and Dickens, Carlyle and Macaulay, Tennyson and
Browning--a futile though pleasant practice, of which the temptations
seem irresistible!

Yet why compare the lily and the rose?

These two young masters had the genius and the luck to be the
progenitors of much of the best art-work that has been done in England
during the last thirty years, in oils, in water-color, in black and
white.

They were both essentially English and of their own time; both
absolutely original, receiving their impressions straight from nature
itself; uninfluenced by any school, ancient or modern, they founded
schools instead of following any, and each was a law unto himself, and a
law-giver unto many others.

[Illustration: FRED WALKER]

Both were equally great in whatever they attempted--landscape, figures,
birds, beasts, or fishes. Who does not remember the fish-monger's shop
by F. Walker, or W. Bagot's little piebald piglings, and their venerable
black mother, and their immense, fat, wallowing pink papa? An ineffable
charm of poetry and refinement, of pathos and sympathy and delicate
humor combined, an incomparable ease and grace and felicity of
workmanship belong to each; and yet in their work are they not as wide
apart as the poles; each complete in himself and yet a complement to the
other?

And, oddly enough, they were both singularly alike in aspect--both small
and slight, though beautifully made, with tiny hands and feet; always
arrayed as the lilies of the field, for all they toiled and spun so
arduously; both had regularly featured faces of a noble cast and most
winning character; both had the best and simplest manners in the world,
and a way of getting themselves much and quickly and permanently
liked....

_Que la terre leur soit légère!_

And who can say that the fame of one is greater than the other's!

Their pinnacles are twin, I venture to believe--of just an equal height
and width and thickness, like their bodies in this life; but unlike
their frail bodies in one respect: no taller pinnacles are to be seen,
methinks, in all the garden of the deathless dead painters of our time,
and none more built to last!

       *       *       *       *       *

But it is not with the art of Little Billee, nor with his fame as a
painter, that we are chiefly concerned in this unpretending little tale,
except in so far as they have some bearing on his character and his
fate.

"I should like to know the detailed history of the Englishman's first
love, and how he lost his innocence!"

"Ask him!"

"Ask him yourself!"

Thus Papelard and Bouchardy, on the morning of Little Billee's first
appearance at Carrel's studio, in the Rue des Potirons St. Michel.

And that is the question the present scribe is doing his little best to
answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

A good-looking, famous, well-bred, and well-dressed youth finds that
London Society opens its doors very readily; he hasn't long to knock;
and it would be difficult to find a youth more fortunately situated,
handsomer, more famous, better dressed or better bred, more seemingly
happy and successful, with more attractive qualities and more condonable
faults, than Little Billee, as Taffy and the Laird found him when they
came to London after their four or five years in foreign parts--their
Wanderjahr.

He had a fine studio and a handsome suite of rooms in Fitzroy Square.
Beautiful specimens of his unfinished work, endless studies, hung on his
studio walls. Everything else was as nice as it could be--the furniture,
the bibelots, and bric-à-brac, the artistic foreign and Eastern
knick-knacks and draperies and hangings and curtains and rugs--the
semi-grand piano by Collard & Collard.

That immortal canvas, the "Moon-Dial" (just begun, and already
commissioned by Moses Lyon, the famous picture-dealer), lay on his
easel.

No man worked harder and with teeth more clinched than Little Billee
when he was at work--none rested or played more discreetly when it was
time to rest or play.

[Illustration: PLATONIC LOVE]

The glass on his mantel-piece was full of cards of invitation,
reminders, pretty mauve and pink and lilac-scented notes; nor were
coronets wanting on many of these hospitable little missives. He had
quite overcome his fancied aversion for bloated dukes and lords and the
rest (we all do sooner or later, if things go well with us); especially
for their wives and sisters and daughters and female cousins; even their
mothers and aunts. In point of fact, and in spite of his tender years,
he was in some danger (for his art) of developing into that type adored
by sympathetic women who haven't got much to do: the friend, the tame
cat, the platonic lover (with many loves)--the squire of dames, the
trusty one, of whom husbands and brothers have no fear!--the delicate,
harmless dilettante of Eros--the dainty shepherd who dwells "dans le
pays du tendre!"--and stops there!

The woman flatters and the man confides--and there is no danger
whatever, I'm told--and I am glad!

One man loves his fiddle (or, alas! his neighbor's sometimes) for all
the melodies he can wake from it--it is but a selfish love!

Another, who is no fiddler, may love a fiddle too; for its symmetry, its
neatness, its color--its delicate grainings, the lovely lines and curves
of its back and front--for its own sake, so to speak. He may have a
whole galleryful of fiddles to love in this innocent way--a harem!--and
yet not know a single note of music, or even care to hear one. He will
dust them and stroke them, and take them down and try to put them in
tune--pizzicato!--and put them back again, and call them ever such sweet
little pet names: viol, viola, viola d'amore, viol di gamba, violino
mio! and breathe his little troubles into them, and they will give back
inaudible little murmurs in sympathetic response, like a damp Æolian
harp; but he will never draw a bow across the strings, nor wake a single
chord--or discord!

And who shall say he is not wise in his generation? It is but an
old-fashioned philistine notion that fiddles were only made to be played
on--the fiddles themselves are beginning to resent it; and rightly, I
wot!

In this harmless fashion Little Billee was friends with more than one
fine lady _de par le monde_.

Indeed, he had been reproached by his more bohemian brothers of the
brush for being something of a tuft-hunter--most unjustly. But nothing
gives such keen offence to our unsuccessful brother, bohemian or
bourgeois, as our sudden intimacy with the so-called great, the little
lords and ladies of this little world! Not even our fame and success,
and all the joy and pride they bring us, are so hard to condone--so
imbittering, so humiliating, to the jealous fraternal heart.

Alas! poor humanity--that the mere countenance of our betters (if they
_are_ our betters!) should be thought so priceless a boon, so consummate
an achievement, so crowning a glory, as all that!

    "A dirty bit of orange-peel,
         The stump of a cigar--
     Once trod on by a princely heel,
         How beautiful they are!"

Little Billee was no tuft-hunter--he was the tuft-hunted, or had been.
No one of his kind was ever more persistently, resolutely, hospitably
harried than this young "hare with many friends" by people of rank and
fashion.

And at first he thought them most charming; as they so often are, these
graceful, gracious, gay, good-natured stoics and barbarians, whose
manners are as easy and simple as their morals--but how much
better!--and who, at least, have this charm, that they can wallow in
untold gold (when they happen to possess it) without ever seeming to
stink of the same: yes, they bear wealth gracefully--and the want of it
more gracefully still! and these are pretty accomplishments that have
yet to be learned by our new aristocracy of the shop and counting-house,
Jew or gentile, which is everywhere elbowing its irresistible way to
the top and front of everything, both here and abroad.

Then he discovered that, much as you might be with them, you could never
be _of_ them, unless perchance you managed to hook on by marrying one of
their ugly ducklings--their failures--their remnants! and even then life
isn't all beer and skittles for a rank outsider, I'm told! Then he
discovered that he didn't want to be of them in the least; especially at
such a cost as that! and that to be very much with them was apt to pall,
like everything else.

Also, he found that they were very mixed; good, bad, and
indifferent--and not always very dainty or select in their
predilections, since they took unto their bosoms such queer outsiders
(just for the sake of being amused a little while) that their capricious
favor ceased to be an honor and a glory--if it ever was! And, then,
their fickleness!

Indeed, he found, or thought he found, that they could be just as
clever, as liberal, as polite or refined--as narrow, insolent,
swaggering, coarse, and vulgar--as handsome, as ugly--as graceful, as
ungainly--as modest or conceited, as any other upper class of the
community--and, indeed, some lower ones!

Beautiful young women, who had been taught how to paint pretty little
landscapes (with an ivy-mantled ruin in the middle distance), talked
technically of painting to him, _de pair à pair_, as though they were
quite on the same artistic level, and didn't mind admitting it, in spite
of the social gulf between.

Hideous old frumps (osseous or obese, yet with unduly bared neck, and
shoulders that made him sick) patronized him and gave him good advice,
and told him to emulate Mr. Buckner both in his genius and his
manners--since Mr. Buckner was the only "gentleman" who ever painted for
hire; and they promised him, in time, an equal success!

Here and there some sweet old darling specially enslaved him by her
kindness, grace, knowledge of life, and tender womanly sympathy, like
the dowager Lady Chiselhurst--or some sweet young one, like the lovely
Duchess of Towers, by her beauty, wit, good-humor, and sisterly interest
in all he did, and who in some vague, distant manner constantly reminded
him of Trilby, although she was such a great and fashionable lady!

But just such darlings, old or young, were to be found, with still
higher ideals, in less exalted spheres; and were easier of access, with
no impassable gulf between--spheres where there was no patronizing,
nothing but deference and warm appreciation and delicate flattery, from
men and women alike--and where the aged Venuses, whose prime was of the
days of Waterloo, went with their historical remains duly shrouded, like
ivy-mantled ruins (and in the middle distance!).

[Illustration: "DARLINGS, OLD OR YOUNG"]

So he actually grew tired of the great before they had time to tire of
him--incredible as it may seem, and against nature; and this saved him
many a heart-burning; and he ceased to be seen at fashionable drums or
gatherings of any kind, except in one or two houses where he was
especially liked and made welcome for his own sake; such as Lord
Chiselhurst's in Piccadilly, where the "Moon-Dial" found a home for a
few years, before going to its last home and final resting-place in the
National Gallery (R. I. P.); or Baron Stoppenheim's in Cavendish Square,
where many lovely little water-colors signed W. B. occupied places of
honor on gorgeously gilded walls; or the gorgeously gilded bachelor
rooms of Mr. Moses Lyon, the picture-dealer in Upper Conduit Street--for
Little Billee (I much grieve to say it of a hero of romance) was an
excellent man of business. That infinitesimal dose of the good old
Oriental blood kept him straight, and not only made him stick to his
last through thick and thin, but also to those whose foot his last was
found to match (for he couldn't or wouldn't alter his last).

He loved to make as much money as he could, that he might spend it
royally in pretty gifts to his mother and sister, whom it was his
pleasure to load in this way, and whose circumstances had been very much
altered by his quick success. There was never a more generous son or
brother than Little Billee of the clouded heart, that couldn't love any
longer!

       *       *       *       *       *

As a set-off to all these splendors, it was also his pleasure now and
again to study London life at its lower end--the eastest end of all.
Whitechapel, the Minories, the Docks, Ratcliffe Highway, Rotherhithe,
soon got to know him well, and he found much to interest him and much to
like among their denizens, and made as many friends there among
ship-carpenters, excisemen, longshoremen, jack-tars, and what not, as in
Bayswater and Belgravia (or Bloomsbury).

He was especially fond of frequenting sing-songs, or "free-and-easys,"
where good, hard-working fellows met of an evening to relax and smoke
and drink and sing--round a table well loaded with steaming tumblers and
pewter pots, at one end of which sits Mr. Chairman in all his glory, and
at the other "Mr. Vice." They are open to any one who can afford a pipe,
a screw of tobacco, and a pint of beer, and who is willing to do his
best and sing a song.

[Illustration: "THE MOON-DIAL"]

No introduction is needed; as soon as any one has seated himself and
made himself comfortable, Mr. Chairman taps the table with his long clay
pipe, begs for silence, and says to his vis-à-vis: "Mr. Vice, it strikes
me as the gen'l'man as is just come in 'as got a singing face. Per'aps,
Mr. Vice, you'll be so very kind as juster harsk the aforesaid gen'l'man
to oblige us with a 'armony."

Mr. Vice then puts it to the new-comer, who, thus appealed to, simulates
a modest surprise, and finally professes his willingness, like Mr.
Barkis; then, clearing his throat a good many times, looks up to the
ceiling, and after one or two unsuccessful starts in different keys,
bravely sings "Kathleen Mavourneen," let us say--perhaps in a touchingly
sweet tenor voice:

    "Kathleen Mavourneen, the gry dawn is brykin',
     The 'orn of the 'unter is 'eard on the 'ill." ...

And Little Billee didn't mind the dropping of all these aitches if the
voice was sympathetic and well in tune, and the sentiment simple,
tender, and sincere.

Or else, with a good rolling jingo bass, it was,

    "'Earts o' hoak are our ships; 'earts o' hoak are our men;
      And we'll fight and we'll conkwer agen and agen!"

And no imperfection of accent, in Little Billee's estimation, subtracted
one jot from the manly British pluck that found expression in these
noble sentiments--nor added one tittle to their swaggering, blatant, and
idiotically aggressive vulgarity!

Well, the song finishes with general applause all round. Then the
chairman says, "Your 'ealth and song, sir!" And drinks, and all do the
same.

Then Mr. Vice asks, "What shall we 'ave the pleasure of saying, sir,
after that very nice 'armony?"

[Illustration: THE CHAIRMAN]

And the blushing vocalist, if he knows the ropes, replies, "A roast
leg o' mutton in Newgate, and nobody to eat it!" Or else, "May 'im as is
going up the 'ill o' prosperity never meet a friend coming down!" Or
else, "'Ere's to 'er as shares our sorrers and doubles our joys!" Or
else, "'Ere's to 'er as shares our joys and doubles our expenses!" and
so forth.

More drink, more applause, and many 'ear, 'ears. And Mr. Vice says to
the singer: "You call, sir. Will you be so good as to call on some other
gen'l'man for a 'armony?" And so the evening goes on.

And nobody was more quickly popular at such gatherings, or sang better
songs, or proposed more touching sentiments, or filled either chair or
vice-chair with more grace and dignity than Little Billee. Not even
Dodor or l'Zouzou could have beaten him at that.

And he was as happy, as genial, and polite, as much at his ease, in
these humble gatherings as in the gilded saloons of the great, where
grand-pianos are, and hired accompanists, and highly-paid singers, and a
good deal of talk while they sing.

So his powers of quick, wide, universal sympathy grew and grew, and made
up to him a little for his lost power of being specially fond of special
individuals. For he made no close friends among men, and ruthlessly
snubbed all attempts at intimacy--all advances towards an affection
which he felt he could not return; and more than one enthusiastic
admirer of his talent and his charm was forced to acknowledge that, with
all his gifts, he seemed heartless and capricious; as ready to drop you
as he had been to take you up.

He loved to be wherever he could meet his kind, high or low; and felt as
happy on a penny steamer as on the yacht of a millionaire--on the
crowded knife-board of an omnibus as on the box-seat of a nobleman's
drag--happier; he liked to feel the warm contact of his fellow-man at
either shoulder and at his back, and didn't object to a little honest
grime! And I think all this genial caressing love of his kind, this
depth and breath of human sympathy, are patent in all his work.

On the whole, however, he came to prefer for society that of the best
and cleverest of his own class--those who live and prevail by the
professional exercise of their own specially trained and highly educated
wits, the skilled workmen of the brain--from the Lord Chief-Justice of
England downward--the salt of the earth, in his opinion: and stuck to
them.

There is no class so genial and sympathetic as _our own_, in the
long-run--even if it be but the criminal class! none where the welcome
is likely to be so genuine and sincere, so easy to win, so difficult to
outstay, if we be but decently pleasant and successful; none where the
memory of us will be kept so green (if we leave any memory at all!).

So Little Billee found it expedient, when he wanted rest and play, to
seek them at the houses of those whose rest and play were like his
own--little halts in a seeming happy life-journey, full of toil and
strain and endeavor; oases of sweet water and cooling shade, where the
food was good and plentiful, though the tents might not be of cloth of
gold; where the talk was of something more to his taste than court or
sport or narrow party politics; the new beauty; the coming match of the
season; the coming ducal conversion to Rome; the last elopement in high
life--the next! and where the music was that of the greatest
music-makers that can be, who found rest and play in making better music
for love than they ever made for hire--and were listened to as they
should be, with understanding and religious silence, and all the fervent
gratitude they deserved.

There were several such houses in London then--and are still--thank
Heaven! And Little Billee had his little billet there--and there he was
wont to drown himself in waves of lovely sound, or streams of clever
talk, or rivers of sweet feminine adulation, seas! oceans!--a somewhat
relaxing bath!--and forget for a while his everlasting chronic plague of
heart-insensibility, which no doctor could explain or cure, and to which
he was becoming gradually resigned--as one does to deafness or blindness
or locomotor ataxia--for it had lasted nearly five years! But now and
again, during sleep, and in a blissful dream, the lost power of
loving--of loving mother, sister, friend--would be restored to him; just
as with a blind man who sometimes dreams he has recovered his sight; and
the joy of it would wake him to the sad reality: till he got to know,
even in his dream, that he was only dreaming, after all, whenever that
priceless boon seemed to be his own once more--and did his utmost not to
wake. And these were nights to be marked with a white stone, and
remembered!

And nowhere was he happier than at the houses of the great surgeons and
physicians who interested themselves in his strange disease. When the
Little Billees of this world fall ill, the great surgeons and physicians
(like the great singers and musicians) do better for them, out of mere
love and kindness, than for the princes of the earth, who pay them
thousand-guinea fees and load them with honors.

       *       *       *       *       *

And of all these notable London houses none was pleasanter than that of
Cornelys the great sculptor, and Little Billee was such a favorite in
that house that he was able to take his friends Taffy and the Laird
there the very day they came to London.

First of all they dined together at a delightful little Franco-Italian
pothouse near Leicester Square, where they had bouillabaisse (imagine
the Laird's delight), and spaghetti, and a poulet rôti, which is _such_
a different affair from a roast fowl! and salad, which Taffy was allowed
to make and mix himself; and they all smoked just where they sat, the
moment they had swallowed their food--as had been their way in the good
old Paris days.

That dinner was a happy one for Taffy and the Laird, with their Little
Billee apparently unchanged--as demonstrative, as genial, and caressing
as ever, and with no swagger to speak of; and with so many things to
talk about that were new to them, and of such delightful interest! They
also had much to say--but they didn't say very much about Paris, for
fear of waking up Heaven knows what sleeping dogs!

And every now and again, in the midst of all this pleasant foregathering
and communion of long-parted friends, the pangs of Little Billee's
miserable mind-malady would shoot through him like poisoned arrows.

He would catch himself thinking how fat and fussy and serious about
trifles Taffy had become; and what a shiftless, feckless, futile duffer
was the Laird; and how greedy they both were, and how red and coarse
their ears and gills and cheeks grew as they fed, and how shiny their
faces; and how little he would care, try as he might, if they both fell
down dead under the table! And this would make him behave more
caressingly to them, more genially and demonstratively than ever--for he
knew it was all a grewsome physical ailment of his own, which he could
no more help than a cataract in his eye!

Then, catching sight of his own face and form in a mirror, he would
curse himself for a puny, misbegotten shrimp, an imp--an abortion--no
bigger, by the side of the herculean Taffy or the burly Laird of
Cockpen, than six-pennorth o' half-pence: a wretched little overrated
follower of a poor trivial craft--a mere light amuser! For what did
pictures matter, or whether they were good or bad, except to the
triflers who painted them, the dealers who sold them, the idle,
uneducated, purse-proud fools who bought them and stuck them up on their
walls because they were told!

And he felt that if a dynamite shell were beneath the table where they
sat, and its fuse were smoking under their very noses, he would neither
wish to warn his friends nor move himself. He didn't care a d----!

And all this made him so lively and brilliant in his talk, so
fascinating and droll and witty, that Taffy and the Laird wondered at
the improvement success and the experience of life had wrought in him,
and marvelled at the happiness of his lot, and almost found it in their
warm, affectionate hearts to feel a touch of envy!

[Illustration: A HAPPY DINNER]

Oddly enough, in a brief flash of silence, "entre la poire et le
fromage," they heard a foreigner at an adjoining table (one of a very
noisy group) exclaim: "Mais quand je vous dis que j'l'ai entendue, moi,
la Svengali! et même qu'elle a chanté l'Impromptu de Chopin absolument
comme si c'était un piano qu'on jouait! voyons!..."

"Farceur! la bonne blague!" said another--and then the conversation
became so noisily general it was no good listening any more.

"Svengali! how funny that name should turn up! I wonder what's become of
_our_ Svengali, by-the-way?" observed Taffy.

"I remember _his_ playing Chopin's Impromptu," said Little Billee; "what
a singular coincidence!"

There were to be more coincidences that night; it never rains them but
it pours!

So our three friends finished their coffee and liqueured up, and went to
Cornelys's, three in a hansom--

                            "Like Mars,
    A-smokin' their poipes and cigyars."

Sir Louis Cornelys, as everybody knows, lives in a palace on Campden
Hill, a house of many windows; and whichever window he looks out of, he
sees his own garden and very little else. In spite of his eighty years,
he works as hard as ever, and his hand has lost but little of its
cunning. But he no longer gives those splendid parties that made him
almost as famous a host as he was an artist.

[Illustration: "A-SMOKIN' THEIR POIPES AND CIGYARS"]

When his beautiful wife died he shut himself up from the world; and
now he never stirs out of his house and grounds except to fulfil his
duties at the Royal Academy and dine once a year with the Queen.

It was very different in the early sixties. There was no pleasanter or
more festive house than his in London, winter or summer--no lordlier
host than he--no more irresistible hostesses than Lady Cornelys and her
lovely daughters; and if ever music had a right to call itself divine,
it was there you heard it--on late Saturday nights during the London
season--when the foreign birds of song come over to reap their harvest
in London Town.

It was on one of the most brilliant of these Saturday nights that Taffy
and the Laird, chaperoned by Little Billee, made their début at Mechelen
Lodge, and were received at the door of the immense music-room by a
tall, powerful man with splendid eyes and a gray beard, and a small
velvet cap on his head--and by a Greek matron so beautiful and stately
and magnificently attired that they felt inclined to sink them on their
bended knees as in the presence of some overwhelming Eastern
royalty--and were only prevented from doing so, perhaps, by the simple,
sweet, and cordial graciousness of her welcome.

And whom should they be shaking hands with next but Antony, Lorrimer,
and the Greek--with each a beard and mustache of nearly five years'
growth!

But they had no time for much exuberant greeting, for there was a sudden
piano crash--and then an immediate silence, as though for pins to
drop--and Signor Giuglini and the wondrous maiden Adelina Patti sang the
Miserere out of Signor Verdi's most famous opera--to the delight of all
but a few very superior ones who had just read Mendelssohn's letters (or
misread them) and despised Italian music; and thought cheaply of "mere
virtuosity," either vocal or instrumental.

When this was over, Little Billee pointed out all the lions to his
friends--from the Prime Minister down to the present scribe--who was
right glad to meet them again and talk of auld lang syne, and present
them to the daughters of the house and other charming ladies.

Then Roucouly, the great French barytone, sang Durien's favorite song,

    "Plaisir d'amour ne dure qu'un moment;
     Chagrin d'amour dure toute la vie...."

with quite a little drawing-room voice--but quite as divinely as he had
sung "Noël, noël," at the Madeleine in full blast one certain Christmas
Eve our three friends remembered well.

Then there was a violin solo by young Joachim, then as now the greatest
violinist of his time; and a solo on the piano-forte by Madame Schumann,
his only peeress! and these came as a wholesome check to the levity of
those for whom all music is but an agreeable pastime, a mere emotional
delight, in which the intellect has no part; and also as a well-deserved
humiliation to all virtuosi who play so charmingly that they make their
listeners forget the master who invented the music in the lesser master
who interprets it!

For these two--man and woman--the highest of their kind, never let you
forget it was Sebastian Bach they were playing--playing in absolute
perfection, in absolute forgetfulness of themselves--so that if you
weren't up to Bach, you didn't have a very good time!

But if you were (or wished it to be understood or thought you were), you
seized your opportunity and you scored; and by the earnestness of your
rapt and tranced immobility, and the stony, gorgon-like intensity of
your gaze, you rebuked the frivolous--as you had rebuked them before by
the listlessness and carelessness of your bored resignation to the
Signorina Patti's trills and fioritures, or M. Roucouly's pretty little
French mannerisms.

And what added so much to the charm of this delightful concert was that
the guests were not packed together sardinewise, as they are at most
concerts; they were comparatively few and well chosen, and could get up
and walk about and talk to their friends between the pieces, and wander
off into other rooms and look at endless beautiful things, and stroll in
the lovely grounds, by moon or star or Chinese-lantern light.

And there the frivolous could sit and chat and laugh and flirt when Bach
was being played inside; and the earnest wander up and down together in
soul-communion, through darkened walks and groves and alleys where the
sound of French or Italian warblings could not reach them, and talk in
earnest tones of the great Zola, or Guy de Maupassant and Pierre Loti,
and exult in beautiful English over the inferiority of English
literature, English art, English music, English everything else.

For these high-minded ones who can only bear the sight of classical
pictures and the sound of classical music do not necessarily read
classical books in any language--no Shakespeares or Dantes or Molières
or Goethes for _them_. They know a trick worth two of that!

And the mere fact that these three immortal French writers of light
books I have just named had never been heard of at this particular
period doesn't very much matter; they had cognate predecessors whose
names I happen to forget. Any stick will do to beat a dog with, and
history is always repeating itself.

Feydeau, or Flaubert, let us say--or for those who don't know French and
cultivate an innocent mind, Miss Austen (for to be dead and buried is
almost as good as to be French and immoral!)--and Sebastian Bach, and
Sandro Botticelli--that all the arts should be represented. These names
are rather discrepant, but they made very good sticks for dog-beating;
and with a thorough knowledge and appreciation of these (or the
semblance thereof), you were well equipped in those days to hold your
own among the elect of intellectual London circles, and snub the
philistine to rights.

Then, very late, a tall, good-looking, swarthy foreigner came in, with a
roll of music in his hands, and his entrance made quite a stir; you
heard all round, "Here's Glorioli," or "Ecco Glorioli," or "Voici
Glorioli," till Glorioli got on your nerves. And beautiful ladies,
ambassadresses, female celebrities of all kinds, fluttered up to him
and cajoled and fawned;--as Svengali would have said, "Prinzessen,
Comtessen, Serene English Altessen!"--and they soon forgot their
Highness and their Serenity!

For with very little pressing Glorioli stood up on the platform, with
his accompanist by his side at the piano, and in his hands a sheet of
music, at which he never looked. He looked at the beautiful ladies, and
ogled and smiled; and from his scarcely parted, moist, thick, bearded
lips, which he always licked before singing, there issued the most
ravishing sounds that had ever been heard from throat of man or woman or
boy! He could sing both high and low and soft and loud, and the
frivolous were bewitched, as was only to be expected; but even the
earnestest of all, caught, surprised, rapt, astounded, shaken, tickled,
teased, harrowed, tortured, tantalized, aggravated, seduced,
demoralized, corrupted into naturalness, forgot to dissemble their
delight.

And Sebastian Bach (the especially adored of all really great musicians,
and also, alas! of many priggish outsiders who don't know a single note
and can't remember a single tune) was well forgotten for the night; and
who were more enthusiastic than the two great players who had been
playing Bach that evening? For these, at all events, were broad and
catholic and sincere, and knew what was beautiful, whatever its kind.

[Illustration: "BONJOUR, SUZON!"]

It was but a simple little song that Glorioli sang, as light and pretty
as it could well be, almost worthy of the words it was written to, and
the words are De Musset's; and I love them so much I cannot resist the
temptation of setting them down here, for the mere sensuous delight of
writing them, as though I had just composed them myself:

    "Bonjour, Suzon, ma fleur des bois!
       Es-tu toujours la plus jolie?
     Je reviens, tel que tu me vois,
       D'un grand voyage en Italie!
     Du paradis j'ai fait le tour--
     J'ai fait des vers--j'ai fait l'amour....
           Mais que t'importe!
           Mais que t'importe!
     Je passe devant ta maison:
           Ouvre ta porte!
           Ouvre ta porte!
             Bonjour, Suzon!

     "Je t'ai vue au temps des lilas.
       Ton cœur joyeux venait d'éclore,
     Et tu disais: 'je ne veux pas,
       Je ne veux pas qu'on m'aime encore.'
     Qu'as-tu fait depuis mon départ?
     Qui part trop tôt revient trop tard.
           Mais que m'importe?
           Mais que m'importe?
     Je passe devant ta maison:
           Ouvre ta porte!
           Ouvre ta porte!
             Bonjour, Suzon!"

And when it began, and while it lasted, and after it was over, one felt
really sorry for all the other singers. And nobody sang any more that
night; for Glorioli was tired, and wouldn't sing again, and none were
bold enough or disinterested enough to sing after him.

Some of my readers may remember that meteoric bird of song, who, though
a mere amateur, would condescend to sing for a hundred guineas in the
saloons of the great (as Monsieur Jourdain sold cloth); who would sing
still better for love and glory in the studios of his friends.

For Glorioli--the biggest, handsomest, and most distinguished-looking
Jew that ever was--one of the Sephardim (one of the Seraphim!)--hailed
from Spain, where he was junior partner in the great firm of Moralés,
Peralés, Gonzalés & Glorioli, wine-merchants, Malaga. He travelled for
his own firm; his wine was good, and he sold much of it in England. But
his voice would bring him far more gold in the month he spent here; for
his wines have been equalled--even surpassed--but there was no voice
like his anywhere in the world, and no more finished singer.

Anyhow, his voice got into Little Billee's head more than any wine, and
the boy could talk of nothing else for days and weeks; and was so
exuberant in his expressions of delight and gratitude that the great
singer took a real fancy to him (especially when he was told that this
fervent boyish admirer was one of the greatest of English painters); and
as a mark of his esteem, privately confided to him after supper that
every century two human nightingales were born--only two! a male and a
female; and that he, Glorioli, was the representative "male rossignol of
this soi-disant dix-neuvième siècle."

"I can well believe that! And the female, your mate that should be--_la
rossignolle_, if there is such a word?" inquired Little Billee.

"Ah! mon ami ... it was Alboni till la petite Adelina Patti came out a
year or two ago; and now it is _la Svengali_."

"La Svengali?"

"Oui, mon fy! You will hear her some day--et vous m'en direz des
nouvelles!"

"Why, you don't mean to say that she's got a better voice than Madame
Alboni?"

"Mon ami, an apple is an excellent thing--until you have tried a peach!
Her voice to that of Alboni is as a peach to an apple--I give you my
word of honor! but bah! the voice is a detail. It's what she does with
it--it's incredible! it gives one cold all down the back! it drives you
mad! it makes you weep hot tears by the spoonful! Ah! the tear, mon fy!
tenez! I can draw everything but _that_! Ça n'est pas dans mes cordes!
_I_ can only madden with _love_! But la Svengali!... And then, in the
middle of it all, prrrout!... she makes you laugh! Ah! le beau rire!
faire rire avec des larmes plein les yeux--voilà qui me passe!... Mon
ami, when I heard her it made me swear that even _I_ would never try to
sing any more--it seemed _too_ absurd! and I kept my word for a month at
least--and you know, je sais ce que je vaux, moi!"

"You are talking of la Svengali, I bet," said Signor Spartia.

"Oui, parbleu! You have heard her?"

"Yes--at Vienna last winter," rejoined the greatest singing-master in
the world. "J'en suis fou! hélas! I thought _I_ could teach a woman how
to sing till I heard that blackguard Svengali's pupil. He has married
her, they say!"

[Illustration: A HUMAN NIGHTINGALE]

"That _blackguard_ Svengali!" exclaimed Little Billee ... "why, that
must be a Svengali I knew in Paris--a famous pianist! a friend of mine!"

"That's the man! also une fameuse crapule (sauf vot' respect); his real
name is Adler; his mother was a Polish singer; and he was a pupil at the
Leipsic Conservatorio. But he's an immense artist, and a great
singing-master, to teach a woman like that! and such a woman! belle
comme un ange--mais bête comme un pot. I tried to talk to her--all she
can say is 'ja wohl,' or 'doch,' or 'nein,' or 'soh'! not a word of
English or French or Italian, though she sings them, oh! but _divinely_!
It is '_il bel canto_' come back to the world after a hundred years...."

"But what voice is it?" asked Little Billee.

"Every voice a mortal woman can have--three octaves--four! and of such a
quality that people who can't tell one tune from another cry with
pleasure at the mere sound of it directly they hear her; just like
anybody else. Everything that Paganini could do with his violin she does
with her voice--only better--and what a voice! un vrai baume!"

"Now I don't mind petting zat you are schbeaking of la Sfencali," said
Herr Kreutzer, the famous composer, joining in. "Quelle merfeille, hein?
I heard her in St. Betersburg, at ze Vinter Balace. Ze vomen all vent
mat, and pulled off zeir bearls and tiamonts and kave zem to her--vent
town on zeir knees and gried and gissed her hants. She tit not say vun
vort! She tit not efen schmile! Ze men schnifelled in ze gorners, and
looked at ze bictures, and tissempled--efen I, Johann Kreutzer! efen ze
Emperor!"

"You're joking," said Little Billee.

"My vrent, I neffer choke ven I talk apout zinging. You vill hear her
zum tay yourzellof, and you vill acree viz me zat zere are two classes
of beoble who zing. In ze vun class, la Sfencali; in ze ozzer, all ze
ozzer zingers!"

"And does she sing good music?"

"I ton't know. _All_ music is koot ven _she_ zings it. I forket ze zong;
I can only sink of ze zinger. Any koot zinger can zing a peautiful zong
and kif bleasure, I zubboce! But I voot zooner hear la Sfencali zing a
scale zan anypotty else zing ze most peautiful zong in ze vorldt--efen
vun of my own! Zat is berhaps how zung ze crate Italian zingers of ze
last century. It vas a lost art, and she has found it; and she must haf
pecun to zing pefore she pecan to schpeak--or else she voot not haf hat
ze time to learn all zat she knows, for she is not yet zirty! She zings
in Paris in Ogdoper, Gott sei dank! and gums here after Christmas to
zing at Trury Lane. Chullien kifs her ten sousand bounts!"

"I wonder, now! Why, that must be the woman I heard at Warsaw two years
ago--or three," said young Lord Witlow. "It was at Count Siloszech's.
He'd heard her sing in the streets, with a tall, black-bearded ruffian,
who accompanied her on a guitar, and a little fiddling gypsy fellow. She
was a handsome woman, with hair down to her knees, but stupid as an owl.
She sang at Siloszech's, and all the fellows went mad and gave her their
watches and diamond studs and gold scarf-pins. By gad! I never heard or
saw anything like it. I don't know much about music myself--couldn't
tell 'God Save the Queen' from 'Pop Goes the Weasel,' if the people
didn't get up and stand and take their hats off; but I was as mad as the
rest--why, I gave her a little German silver vinaigrette I'd just bought
for my wife; hanged if I didn't--and I was only just married, you know!
It's the peculiar twang of her voice, I suppose!"

And hearing all this, Little Billee made up his mind that life had still
something in store for him, since he would some day hear la Svengali.
Anyhow, he wouldn't shoot himself till then!

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus the night wore itself away. The Prinzessen, Comtessen, and Serene
English Altessen (and other ladies of less exalted rank) departed home
in cabs and carriages; and hostess and daughters went to bed. Late
sitters of the ruder sex supped again, and smoked and chatted and
listened to comic songs and recitations by celebrated actors. Noble
dukes hobnobbed with low comedians; world-famous painters and sculptors
sat at the feet of Hebrew capitalists and aitchless millionaires.
Judges, cabinet ministers, eminent physicians, and warriors and
philosophers saw Sunday morning steal over Campden Hill and through the
many windows of Mechelen Lodge, and listened to the pipe of
half-awakened birds, and smelled the freshness of the dark summer dawn.
And as Taffy and the Laird walked home to the Old Hummums by daylight,
they felt that last night was ages ago, and that since then they had
foregathered with "much there was of the best in London." And then they
reflected that "much there was of the best in London" were still
strangers to them--except by reputation--for there had not been time for
many introductions: and this had made them feel a little out of it; and
they found they hadn't had such a very good time after all. And there
were no cabs. And they were tired, and their boots were tight.

And the last they had seen of Little Billee before leaving was a glimpse
of their old friend in a corner of Lady Cornelys's boudoir, gravely
playing cup-and-ball with Fred Walker for sixpences--both so rapt in the
game that they were unconscious of anything else, and both playing so
well (with either hand) that they might have been professional
champions!

And that saturnine young sawbones, Jakes Talboys (now Sir Jakes, and one
of the most genial of Her Majesty's physicians), who sometimes after
supper and champagne was given to thoughtful, sympathetic, and acute
observation of his fellow-men, remarked to the Laird in a whisper that
was almost convivial: "Rather an enviable pair! Their united ages amount
to forty-eight or so, their united weights to about fifteen stone, and
they couldn't carry you or me between them. But if you were to roll all
the other brains that have been under this roof to-night into one, you
wouldn't reach the sum of their united genius.... I wonder which of the
two is the most unhappy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

The season over, the song-birds flown, summer on the wane, his picture,
the "Moon-Dial," sent to Moses Lyon's (the picture-dealer in Conduit
Street), Little Billee felt the time had come to go and see his mother
and sister in Devonshire, and make the sun shine twice as brightly for
them during a month or so, and the dew fall softer!

So one fine August morning found him at the Great Western Station--the
nicest station in all London, I think--except the stations that book you
to France and far away.

It always seems so pleasant to be going west! Little Billee loved that
station, and often went there for a mere stroll, to watch the people
starting on their westward way, following the sun towards Heaven knows
what joys or sorrows, and envy them their sorrows or their joys--any
sorrows or joys that were not merely physical, like a chocolate drop or
a pretty tune, a bad smell or a toothache.

And as he took a seat in a second-class carriage (it would be third in
these democratic days), south corner, back to the engine, with _Silas
Marner_, and Darwin's _Origin of Species_ (which he was reading for the
third time), and _Punch_, and other literature of a lighter kind, to
beguile him on his journey, he felt rather bitterly how happy he could
be if the little spot, or knot, or blot, or clot which paralyzed that
convolution of his brain where he kept his affections could but be
conjured away!

The dearest mother, the dearest sister in the world, in the dearest
little sea-side village (or town) that ever was! and other dear
people--especially Alice, sweet Alice with hair so brown, his sister's
friend, the simple, pure, and pious maiden of his boyish dreams: and
himself, but for that wretched little kill-joy cerebral occlusion, as
sound, as healthy, as full of life and energy as he had ever been!

[Illustration: CUP-AND-BALL]

And when he wasn't reading _Silas Marner_, or looking out of window at
the flying landscape, and watching it revolve round its middle distance
(as it always seems to do), he was sympathetically taking stock of his
fellow-passengers, and mildly envying them, one after another,
indiscriminately!

A fat, old, wheezy philistine, with a bulbous nose and only one eye, who
had a plain, sickly daughter, to whom he seemed devoted, body and soul;
an old lady, who still wept furtively at recollections of the parting
with her grandchildren, which had taken place at the station (they had
borne up wonderfully, as grandchildren do); a consumptive curate, on the
opposite corner seat by the window, whose tender, anxious wife (sitting
by his side) seemed to have no thoughts in the whole world but for him;
and her patient eyes were his stars of consolation, since he turned to
look into them almost every minute, and always seemed a little the
happier for doing so. There is no better star-gazing than that!

So Little Billee gave her up _his_ corner seat, that the poor sufferer
might have those stars where he could look into them comfortably without
turning his head.

Indeed (as was his wont with everybody), Little Billee made himself
useful and pleasant to his fellow-travellers in many ways--so many that
long before they had reached their respective journeys' ends they had
almost grown to love him as an old friend, and longed to know who this
singularly attractive and brilliant youth, this genial, dainty,
benevolent little princekin could possibly be, who was dressed so
fashionably, and yet went second class, and took such kind thought of
others; and they wondered at the happiness that must be his at merely
being alive, and told him more of their troubles in six hours than they
told many an old friend in a year.

But he told them nothing about himself--that self he was so sick of--and
left them to wonder.

And at his own journey's end, the farthest end of all, he found his
mother and sister waiting for him, in a beautiful little
pony-carriage--his last gift--and with them sweet Alice, and in her
eyes, for one brief moment, that unconscious look of love surprised
which is not to be forgotten for years and years and years--which can
only be seen by the eyes that meet it, and which, for the time it lasts
(just a flash), makes all women's eyes look exactly the same (I'm told):
and it seemed to Little Billee that, for the twentieth part of a second,
Alice had looked at him with Trilby's eyes--or his mother's, when that
he was a little tiny boy.

It all but gave him the thrill he thirsted for! Another twentieth part
of a second, perhaps, and his brain-trouble would have melted away; and
Little Billee would have come into his own again--the kingdom of love!

A beautiful human eye! _Any_ beautiful eye--a dog's, a deer's, a
donkey's, an owl's even! To think of all that it can look, and all that
it can see! all that it can even _seem_, sometimes! What a prince among
gems! what a star!

But a beautiful eye that lets the broad white light of infinite space
(so bewildering and garish and diffused) into one pure virgin heart, to
be filtered there! and lets it out again, duly warmed, softened,
concentrated, sublimated, focussed to a point as in a precious stone,
that it may shed itself (a love-laden effulgence) into some stray
fellow-heart close by--through pupil and iris, entre quatre-z-yeux--the
very elixir of life!

Alas! that such a crown-jewel should ever lose its lustre and go blind!

Not so blind or dim, however, but it can still see well enough to look
before and after, and inward and upward, and drown itself in tears, and
yet not die! And that's the dreadful pity of it. And this is a quite
uncalled-for digression; and I can't think why I should have gone out of
my way (at considerable pains) to invent it! In fact--

    "Of this here song, should I be axed the reason for to show,
     I don't exactly know, I don't exactly know!
     _But all my fancy dwells upon Nancy._" ...

"How pretty Alice has grown, mother! quite lovely, I think! and so nice;
but she was always as nice as she could be!"

So observed Little Billee to his mother that evening as they sat in the
garden and watched the crescent moon sink to the Atlantic.

"Ah! my darling Willie! If you _could_ only guess how happy you would
make your poor old mammy by growing fond of Alice.... And Blanche, too!
what a joy for _her_!"

"Good heavens! mother.... Alice is not for the likes of _me_! She's for
some splendid young Devon squire, six foot high, and acred and
whiskered within an inch of his life!..."

"Ah, my darling Willie! you are not of those who ask for love in
vain.... If you only _knew_ how she believes in you! She almost beats
your poor old mammy at _that_!"

[Illustration: SWEET ALICE]

And that night he dreamed of Alice--that he loved her as a sweet good
woman should be loved; and knew, even in his dream, that it was but a
dream; but, oh! it was good! and he managed not to wake; and it was a
night to be marked with a white stone! And (still in his dream) she had
kissed him, and healed him of his brain-trouble forever. But when he
woke next morning, alas! his brain-trouble was with him still, and he
felt that no dream kiss would ever cure it--nothing but a real kiss from
Alice's own pure lips!

And he rose thinking of Alice, and dressed and breakfasted thinking of
her--and how fair she was, and how innocent, and how well and carefully
trained up the way she should go--the beau ideal of a wife.... Could she
possibly care for a shrimp like himself?

For in his love of outward form he could not understand that any woman
who had eyes to see should ever quite condone the signs of physical
weakness in man, in favor of any mental gifts or graces whatsoever.

Little Greek that he was, he worshipped the athlete, and opined that all
women without exception--all English women especially--must see with the
same eyes as himself.

He had once been vain and weak enough to believe in Trilby's love (with
a Taffy standing by--a careless, unsusceptible Taffy, who was like unto
the gods of Olympus!)--and Trilby had given him up at a word, a
hint--for all his frantic clinging.

She would not have given up Taffy, _pour si peu_, had Taffy but lifted a
little finger! It is always "just whistle, and I'll come to you, my
lad!" with the likes of Taffy ... but Taffy hadn't even whistled! Yet
still he kept thinking of Alice--and he felt he couldn't think of her
well enough till he went out for a stroll by himself on a sheep-trimmed
down. So he took his pipe and his Darwin, and out he strolled into the
early sunshine--up the green Red Lane, past the pretty church, Alice's
father's church--and there, at the gate, patiently waiting for his
mistress, sat Alice's dog--an old friend of his, whose welcome was a
very warm one.

Little Billee thought of Thackeray's lovely poem in _Pendennis_:

    "She comes--she's here--she's past!
     May heaven go with her!..."

Then he and the dog went on together to a little bench on the edge of
the cliff--within sight of Alice's bedroom window. It was called "the
Honeymooners' Bench."

"That look--that look--that look! Ah--but Trilby had looked like that,
too! And there are many Taffys in Devon!"

He sat himself down and smoked and gazed at the sea below, which the sun
(still in the east) had not yet filled with glare and robbed of the
lovely sapphire-blue, shot with purple and dark green, that comes over
it now and again of a morning on that most beautiful coast.

There was a fresh breeze from the west, and the long, slow billows broke
into creamier foam than ever, which reflected itself as a tender white
gleam in the blue concavities of their shining shoreward curves as they
came rolling in. The sky was all of turquoise but for the smoke of a
distant steamer--a long thin horizontal streak of dun--and there were
little brown or white sails here and there, dotting; and the stately
ships went on....

Little Billee tried hard to feel all this beauty with his heart as well
as his brain--as he had so often done when a boy--and cursed his
insensibility out loud for at least the thousand and first time.

Why couldn't these waves of air and water be turned into equivalent
waves of sound, that he might feel them through the only channel that
reached his emotions! That one joy was still left to him--but, alas!
alas! he was only a painter of pictures--and not a maker of music!

He recited "Break, break, break," to Alice's dog, who loved him, and
looked up into his face with sapient, affectionate eyes--and whose
name, like that of so many dogs in fiction and so few in fact, was
simply Tray. For Little Billee was much given to monologues out loud,
and profuse quotations from his favorite bards.

Everybody quoted that particular poem either mentally or aloud when they
sat on that particular bench--except a few old-fashioned people, who
still said,

    "Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll!"

or people of the very highest culture, who only quoted the nascent (and
crescent) Robert Browning; or people of no culture at all, who simply
held their tongues--and only felt the more!

Tray listened silently.

"Ah, Tray, the best thing but one to do with the sea is to paint it. The
next best thing to that is to bathe in it. The best of all is to lie
asleep at the bottom. How would _you_ like that?

    "'And on thy ribs the limpet sticks,
      And in thy heart the scrawl shall play....'"

Tray's tail became as a wagging point of interrogation, and he turned
his head first on one side and then on the other--his eyes fixed on
Little Billee's, his face irresistible in its genial doggy wistfulness.

"Tray, what a singularly good listener you are--and therefore what
singularly good manners you've got! I suppose all dogs have!" said
Little Billee; and then, in a very tender voice, he exclaimed,

"Alice, Alice, Alice!"

And Tray uttered a soft, cooing, nasal croon in his head register,
though he was a barytone dog by nature, with portentous, warlike
chest-notes of the jingo order.

"Tray, your mistress is a parson's daughter, and therefore twice as much
of a mystery as any other woman in this puzzling world!

"Tray, if my heart weren't stopped with wax, like the ears of the
companions of Ulysses when they rowed past the sirens--you've heard of
Ulysses, Tray? he loved a dog--if my heart weren't stopped with wax, I
should be deeply in love with your mistress; perhaps she would marry me
if I asked her--there's no accounting for tastes!--and I know enough of
myself to know that I should make her a good husband--that I should make
her happy--and I should make two other women happy besides.

"As for myself personally, Tray, it doesn't very much matter. One good
woman would do as well as another, if she's equally good-looking. You
doubt it? Wait till you get a pimple inside your bump of--your bump
of--wherever you keep your fondnesses, Tray.

"For that's what's the matter with me--a pimple--just a little clot of
blood at the root of a nerve, and no bigger than a pin's point!

"That's a small thing to cause such a lot of wretchedness, and wreck a
fellow's life, isn't it? Oh, curse it, curse it, curse it--every day and
all day long!

"And just as small a thing will take it away, I'm told!

"Ah! grains of sand are small things--and so are diamonds! But diamond
or grain of sand, only Alice has got that small thing! Alice alone, in
all the world, has got the healing touch for me now; the hands, the
lips, the eyes! I know it--I feel it! I dreamed it last night! She
looked me well in the face, and took my hand--both hands--and kissed me,
eyes and mouth, and told me how she loved me. Ah! what a dream it was!
And my little clot melted away like a snow-flake on the lips, and I was
my old self again, after many years--and all through that kiss of a pure
woman.

"I've never been kissed by a pure woman in my life--never! except by my
dear mother and sister; and mothers and sisters don't count, when it
comes to kissing.

"Ah! sweet physician that she is, and better than all! It will all come
back again with a rush, just as I dreamed, and we will have a good time
together, we three!...

[Illustration: "MAY HEAVEN GO WITH HER!"]

"But your mistress is a parson's daughter, and believes everything she's
been taught from a child, just as you do--at least, I hope so. And I
like her for it--and you too.

"She has believed her father--will she ever believe me, who think so
differently? And if she does, will it be good for her?--and then, where
will her father come in?

"Oh! it's a bad thing to live, and no longer believe and trust in your
father, Tray! to doubt either his honesty or his intelligence. For he
(with your mother to help) has taught you all the best he knows, if he
has been a good father--till some one else comes and teaches you
better--or worse!

"And, then, what are you to believe of what good still remains of all
that early teaching--and how are you to sift the wheat from the
chaff?...

"Kneel undisturbed, fair saint! I, for one, will never seek to undermine
thy faith in any father, on earth or above it!

"Yes, there she kneels in her father's church, her pretty head bowed
over her clasped hands, her cloak and skirts falling in happy folds
about her: I see it all!

"And underneath, that poor, sweet, soft, pathetic thing of flesh and
blood, the eternal woman--great heart and slender brain--forever
enslaved or enslaving, never self-sufficing, never free ... that dear,
weak, delicate shape, so cherishable, so perishable, that I've had to
paint so often, and know so well by heart! and love ... ah, how I love
it! Only painter-fellows and sculptor-fellows can ever quite know the
fulness of that pure love.

"There she kneels and pours forth her praise or plaint, meekly and duly.
Perhaps it's for me she's praying!

    "'Leave thou thy sister when she prays.'

"She believes her poor little prayer will be heard and answered
somewhere up aloft. The impossible will be done. She wants what she
wants so badly, and prays for it so hard.

"She believes--she believes--what _doesn't_ she believe, Tray?

"The world was made in six days. It is just six thousand years old. Once
it all lay smothered under rain-water for many weeks, miles deep,
because there were so many wicked people about somewhere down in
Jude_e_, where they didn't know everything! A costly kind of clearance!
And then there was Noah, who _wasn't_ wicked, and his most respectable
family, and his ark--and Jonah and his whale--and Joshua and the sun,
and what not. I remember it all, you see, and, oh! such wonderful things
that have happened since! And there's everlasting agony for those who
don't believe as she does; and yet she is happy, and good, and very
kind; for the mere thought of any live creature in pain makes her
wretched!

"After all, if she believes in me, she'll believe in anything; let her!

"Indeed, I'm not sure that it's not rather ungainly for a pretty woman
_not_ to believe in all these good old cosmic taradiddles, as it is for
a pretty child not to believe in Little Red Riding-hood, and Jack and
the Beanstalk, and Morgiana and the Forty Thieves; we learn them at our
mother's knee, and how nice they are! Let us go on believing them as
long as we can, till the child grows up and the woman dies and it's all
found out.

"Yes, Tray, I will be dishonest for her dear sake. I will kneel by her
side, if ever I have the happy chance, and ever after, night and
morning, and all day long on Sundays if she wants me to! What will I
_not_ do for that one pretty woman who believes in _me_? I will respect
even _that_ belief, and do my little best to keep it alive forever. It
is much too precious an earthly boon for _me_ to play ducks and drakes
with....

"So much for Alice, Tray--your sweet mistress and mine.

"But, then, there's Alice's papa--and that's another pair of sleeves, as
we say in France.

"Ought one ever to play at make-believe with a full-grown man for any
consideration whatever--even though he be a parson, and a possible
father-in-law? _There's_ a case of conscience for you!

"When I ask him for his daughter, as I must, and he asks me for my
profession of faith, as he will, what can I tell him? The truth?

"But, then, what will _he_ say? What allowances will _he_ make for a
poor little weak-kneed, well-meaning waif of a painter-fellow like me,
whose only choice lay between Mr. Darwin and the Pope of Rome, and who
has chosen once and forever--and that long ago--before he'd ever even
heard of Mr. Darwin's name.

"Besides, why should he make allowances for me? I don't for him. I think
no more of a parson than he does of a painter-fellow--and that's
precious little, I'm afraid.

"What will he think of a man who says:

"'Look here! the God of your belief isn't mine and never will be--but I
love your daughter, and she loves me, and I'm the only man to make her
happy!'

"He's no Jephthah; he's made of flesh and blood, although he's a
parson--and loves his daughter as much as Shylock loved his.

"Tell me, Tray--thou that livest among parsons--what man, not being a
parson himself, can guess how a parson would think, an average parson,
confronted by such a poser as that?

"Does he, dare he, _can_ he ever think straight or simply on any subject
as any other man thinks, hedged in as he is by so many limitations?

"He is as shrewd, vain, worldly, self-seeking, ambitious, jealous,
censorious, and all the rest, as you or I, Tray--for all his Christian
profession--and just as fond of his kith and kin!

"He is considered a gentleman--which perhaps you and I are not--unless
we happen to behave as such; it is a condition of his noble calling.
Perhaps it's in order to become a gentleman that he's become a parson!
It's about as short a royal road as any to that enviable distinction--as
short almost as her Majesty's commission, and much safer, and much less
expensive--within reach of the sons of most fairly successful butchers
and bakers and candlestick-makers.

"While still a boy he has bound himself irrevocably to certain beliefs,
which he will be paid to preserve and preach and enforce through life,
and act up to through thick and thin--at all events, in the eyes of
others--even his nearest and dearest--even the wife of his bosom.

"They are his bread and butter, these beliefs--and a man mustn't quarrel
with his bread and butter. But a parson must quarrel with those who
don't believe as he tells them!

[Illustration: "'SO MUCH FOR ALICE, TRAY'"]

"Yet a few years' thinking and reading and experience of life, one would
suppose, might possibly just shake his faith a little (just as though,
instead of being parson, he had been tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor,
gentleman, apothecary, ploughboy, thief), and teach him that many of
these beliefs are simply childish--and some of them very wicked
indeed--and most immoral.

"It is very wicked and most immoral to believe, or affect to believe,
and tell others to believe, that the unseen, unspeakable, unthinkable
Immensity we're all part and parcel of, source of eternal, infinite,
indestructible life and light and might, is a kind of wrathful,
glorified, and self-glorifying ogre in human shape, with human passions,
and most inhuman hates--who suddenly made us out of nothing, one fine
day--just for a freak--and made us so badly that we fell the next--and
turned us adrift the day after--damned us from the very beginning--_ab
ovo--ab ovo usque ad malum_--ha, ha!--and ever since! never gave us a
chance!

"All-merciful Father, indeed! Why, the Prince of Darkness was an angel
in comparison (and a gentleman into the bargain).

"Just think of it, Tray--a finger in every little paltry pie--an eye and
an ear at every key-hole, even that of the larder, to catch us tripping,
and find out if we're praising loud enough, or grovelling low enough, or
fasting hard enough--poor god-forsaken worms!

"And if we're naughty and disobedient, everlasting torment for us;
torture of so hideous a kind that we wouldn't inflict it on the basest
criminal, not for one single moment!

"Or else, if we're good and do as we are bid, an eternity of bliss so
futile, so idle, and so tame that we couldn't stand it for a week, but
for thinking of its one horrible alternative, and of our poor brother
for ever and ever roasting away, and howling for the drop of water he
never gets.

"Everlasting flame, or everlasting dishonor--nothing between!

"Isn't it ludicrous as well as pitiful--a thing to make one snigger
through one's tears? Isn't it a grievous sin to believe in such things
as these, and go about teaching and preaching them, and being paid for
it--a sin to be heavily chastised, and a shame? What a legacy!

"They were shocking bad artists, those conceited, narrow-minded Jews,
those poor old doting monks and priests and bigots of the grewsome, dark
age of faith! They couldn't draw a bit--no perspective, no
chiaro-oscuro; and it's a woful image they managed to evolve for us out
of the depths of their fathomless ignorance, in their zeal to keep us
off all the forbidden fruit we're all so fond of, because we were built
like that! And by whom? By our Maker, I suppose (who also made the
forbidden fruit, and made it very nice--and put it so conveniently for
you and me to see and smell and reach, Tray--and sometimes even pick,
alas!).

"And even at that it's a failure. Only the very foolish little birds are
frightened into good behavior. The naughty ones laugh and wink at each
other, and pull out its hair and beard when nobody's looking, and build
their nests out of the straw it's stuffed with (the naughty little birds
in black, especially), and pick up what they want under its very nose,
and thrive uncommonly well; and the good ones fly away out of sight; and
some day, perhaps, find a home in some happy, useful father-land far
away, where the Father isn't a bit like this. Who knows?

"And I'm one of the good little birds, Tray--at least, I hope so. And
that unknown Father lives in me whether I will or no, and I love Him
whether He be or not, just because I can't help it, and with the best
and bravest love that can be--the perfect love that believeth no evil,
and seeketh no reward, and casteth out fear. For I'm His father as much
as He's mine, since I've conceived the thought of Him after my own
fashion!

"And He lives in you too, Tray--you and all your kind. Yes, good dog,
you king of beasts, I see it in your eyes....

"Ah, bon Dieu Père, le Dieu des bonnes gens! Oh! if we only knew for
_certain_, Tray! what martyrdom would we not endure, you and I, with a
happy smile and a grateful heart--for sheer _love_ of such a father! How
little should _we_ care for the things of this earth!

"But the poor parson?

"He must willy-nilly go on believing, or affecting to believe, just as
he is told, _word for word_, or else good-bye to his wife and children's
bread and butter, his own preferment, perhaps even his very
gentility--that gentility of which his Master thought so little, and he
and his are apt to think so much--with possibly the Archbishopric of
Canterbury at the end of it, the bâton de maréchal that lies in every
clerical knapsack.

"What a temptation! one is but human!

"So how can he be honest without believing certain things, to believe
which (without shame) one must be as simple as a little child; as,
by-the-way, he is so cleverly told to be in these matters, and so
cleverly tells us--and so seldom is himself in any other matter
whatever--his own interests, other people's affairs, the world, the
flesh, and the devil! And that's clever of him too....

"And if he chooses to be as simple as a little child, why shouldn't I
treat him as a little child, for his own good, and fool him to the top
of his little bent for his dear daughter's sake, that I may make her
happy, and thereby him too?

"And if he's _not_ quite so simple as all that, and makes artful little
compromises with his conscience--for a good purpose, of course--why
shouldn't I make artful little compromises with mine, and for a better
purpose still, and try to get what I want in the way _he_ does? I want
to marry his daughter far worse than he can ever want to live in a
palace, and ride in a carriage and pair with a mitre on the panels.

"If he _cheats_, why shouldn't I cheat too?

"If _he_ cheats, he cheats everybody all round--the wide, wide world,
and something wider and higher still that can't be measured, something
in himself. _I_ only cheat _him_!

"_If_ he cheats, he cheats for the sake of very worldly things
indeed--tithes, honors, influence, power, authority, social
consideration and respect--not to speak of bread and butter! _I_ only
cheat for the love of a lady fair--and cheating for cheating, I like my
cheating best.

"So, whether he cheats or not, I'll--

"Confound it! what would old Taffy do in such a case, I wonder?...

"Oh, bother! it's no good wondering what old Taffy would do.

"Taffy never wants to marry _anybody's_ daughter; he doesn't even want
to paint her! He only wants to paint his beastly ragamuffins and thieves
and drunkards, and be left alone.

"Besides, Taffy's as simple as a little child himself, and couldn't fool
any one, and wouldn't if he could--not even a parson. But if any one
tries to fool _him_, my eyes! don't he cut up rough, and call names, and
kick up a shindy, and even knock people down! That's the worst of
fellows like Taffy. They're too good for this world and too solemn.
They're impossible, and lack all sense of humor. In point of fact,
Taffy's a _gentleman_--poor fellow! _et puis voilà!_

"I'm not simple--worse luck; and I can't knock people down--I only wish
I could! I can only paint them! and not even _that_ 'as they really
are!' ... Good old Taffy!...

"Faint heart never won fair lady!

"Oh, happy, happy thought--I'll be brave and win!

"I can't knock people down, or do doughty deeds, but I'll be brave in my
own little way--the only way I can....

"I'll simply lie through thick and thin--I must--I will--nobody need
ever be a bit the wiser! I can do more good by lying than by telling the
truth, and make more deserving people happy, including myself and the
sweetest girl alive--the end shall justify the means: that's my excuse,
my only excuse! and this lie of mine is on so stupendous a scale that it
will have to last me for life. It's my only one, but its name is _Lion_!
and I'll never tell another as long as I live.

"And now that I know what temptation really is, I'll never think any
harm of any parson any more ... never, never, never!"

So the little man went on, as if he knew all about it, had found it all
out for himself, and nobody else had ever found it out before! and I am
not responsible for his ways of thinking (which are not necessarily my
own).

It must be remembered, in extenuation, that he was very young, and not
very wise: no philosopher, no scholar--just a painter of lovely
pictures; only that and nothing more. Also, that he was reading Mr.
Darwin's immortal book for the third time, and it was a little too
strong for him; also, that all this happened in the early sixties, long
ere Religion had made up her mind to meet Science half-way, and hobnob
and kiss and be friends. Alas! before such a lying down of the lion and
the lamb can ever come to pass, Religion will have to perform a larger
share of the journey than half, I fear!

Then, still carried away by the flood of his own eloquence (for he had
never had such an innings as this, no such a listener), he again
apostrophized the dog Tray, who had been growing somewhat inattentive
(like the reader, perhaps), in language more beautiful than ever:

"Oh, to be like you, Tray--and secrete love and good-will from morn till
night, from night till morning--like saliva, without effort! with never
a moment's cessation of flow, even in disgrace and humiliation! How much
better to love than to be loved--to love as you do, my Tray--so warmly,
so easily, so unremittingly--to forgive all wrongs and neglect and
injustice so quickly and so well--and forget a kindness never! Lucky dog
that you are!

    "'Oh! could I feel as I have felt, or be as I have been,
      Or weep as I could once have wept, o'er many a vanished scene,
      As springs in deserts found seem sweet, all brackish tho' they be,
      So 'midst this withered waste of life those tears would flow to me!'

"What do you think of those lines, Tray? I _love_ them, because my
mother taught them to me when I was about your age--six years old, or
seven! and before the bard who wrote them had fallen; like Lucifer, son
of the morning! Have you ever heard of Lord Byron, Tray? He too, like
Ulysses, loved a dog, and many people think that's about the best there
is to be said of him nowadays! Poor Humpty Dumpty! Such a swell as he
once was! 'Not all the king's horses, nor all the--'"

Here Tray jumped up suddenly and bolted--he saw some one else he was
fond of, and ran to meet him. It was the vicar, coming out of his
vicarage.

A very nice-looking vicar--fresh, clean, alert, well tanned by sun and
wind and weather--a youngish vicar still; tall, stout, gentlemanlike,
shrewd, kindly, wordly, a trifle pompous, and authoritative more than a
trifle; not much given to abstract speculation, and thinking fifty times
more of any sporting and orthodox young country squire, well-inched and
well-acred (and well-whiskered), than of all the painters in
Christendom.

"'When Greeks joined Greeks, then was the tug of war,'" thought Little
Billee; and he felt a little uncomfortable. Alice's father had never
loomed so big and impressive before, or so distressingly nice to look
at.

"Welcome, my Apelles, to your ain countree, which is growing quite proud
of you, I declare! Young Lord Archie Waring was saying only last night
that he wished he had half your talent! He's _crazed_ about painting,
you know, and actually wants to be a painter himself! The poor dear old
marquis is quite sore about it!"

With this happy exordium the parson stopped and shook hands; and they
both stood for a while, looking seaward. The parson said the usual
things about the sea--its blueness; its grayness; its greenness; its
beauty; its sadness; its treachery.

    "'Who shall put forth on thee,
      Unfathomable sea!'"

"Who indeed!" answered Little Billee, quite agreeing. "I vote _we_
don't, at all events." So they turned inland.

The parson said the usual things about the land (from the
country-gentleman's point of view), and the talk began to flow quite
pleasantly, with quoting of the usual poets, and capping of quotations
in the usual way--for they had known each other many years, both here
and in London. Indeed, the vicar had once been Little Billee's tutor.

And thus, amicably, they entered a small wooded hollow. Then the vicar,
turning of a sudden his full blue gaze on the painter, asked, sternly:

"What book's that you've got in your hand, Willie?"

"A--a--it's the _Origin of Species_, by Charles Darwin. I'm very
f-f-fond of it. I'm reading it for the third time.... It's very
g-g-good. It _accounts_ for things, you know."

Then, after a pause, and still more sternly:

"What place of worship do you most attend in London--especially of an
evening, William?"

Then stammered Little Billee, all self-control forsaking him:

"I d-d-don't attend any place of worship at all, morning, afternoon, or
evening. I've long given up going to church altogether. I can only be
frank with you; I'll tell you why...."

And as they walked along the talk drifted on to very momentous subjects
indeed, and led, unfortunately, to a serious falling out--for which
probably both were to blame--and closed in a distressful way at the
other end of the little wooded hollow--a way most sudden and unexpected,
and quite grievous to relate. When they emerged into the open the parson
was quite white, and the painter crimson.

"Sir," said the parson, squaring himself up to more than his full height
and breadth and dignity, his face big with righteous wrath, his voice
full of strong menace--"sir, you're--you're a--you're a _thief_, sir, a
_thief_! You're trying to _rob me of my Saviour_! Never you dare to
darken _my_ door-step again!"

"Sir," said Little Billee, with a bow, "if it comes to calling names,
you're--you're a--no; you're Alice's father; and whatever else you are
besides, I'm another for trying to be honest with a parson; so
good-morning to you."

And each walked off in an opposite direction, stiff as pokers; and Tray
stood between, looking first at one receding figure, then at the
other, disconsolate.

[Illustration: "'YOU'RE A _THIEF_, SIR!'"]

And thus Little Billee found out that he could no more lie than he could
fly. And so he did not marry sweet Alice after all, and no doubt it was
ordered for her good and his. But there was tribulation for many days in
the house of Bagot, and for many months in one tender, pure, and pious
bosom.

And the best and the worst of it all is that, not very many years after,
the good vicar--more fortunate than most clergymen who dabble in stocks
and shares--grew suddenly very rich through a lucky speculation in Irish
beer, and suddenly, also, took to thinking seriously about things (as a
man of business should)--more seriously than he had ever thought before.
So at least the story goes in North Devon, and it is not so new as to be
incredible. Little doubts grew into big ones--big doubts resolved
themselves into downright negations. He quarrelled with his bishop; he
quarrelled with his dean; he even quarrelled with his "poor dear old
marquis," who died before there was time to make it up again. And
finally he felt it his duty, in conscience, to secede from a Church
which had become too narrow to hold him, and took himself and his
belongings to London, where at least he could breathe. But there he fell
into a great disquiet, for the long habit of feeling himself always _en
évidence_--of being looked up to and listened to without contradiction;
of exercising influence and authority in spiritual matters (and even
temporal); of impressing women, especially, with his commanding
presence, his fine sonorous voice, his lofty brow, so serious and
smooth, his soft, big, waving hands, which soon lost their country
tan--all this had grown as a second nature to him, the breath of his
nostrils, a necessity of his life. So he rose to be the most popular
Unitarian preacher of his day, and pretty broad at that.

But his dear daughter Alice, she stuck to the old faith, and married a
venerable High-Church archdeacon, who very cleverly clutched at and
caught her and saved her for himself just as she stood shivering on the
very brink of Rome; and they were neither happy nor unhappy
together--_un ménage bourgeois, ni beau ni laid, ni bon ni mauvais_. And
thus, alas! the bond of religious sympathy, that counts for so much in
united families, no longer existed between father and daughter, and the
heart's division divided them. _Ce que c'est que de nous!_ ... The pity
of it!

And so no more of sweet Alice with hair so brown.




Part Sixth

    '"Vraiment, la reine auprès d'elle était laide
            Quand, vers le soir,
      Elle passait sur le pont de Tolède
            En corset noir!
      Un chapelet du temps de Charlemagne
            Ornait son cou....
      _La vent qui vient à travers la montagne
            Me rendra fou!_

    "'Dansez, chantez, villageois! la nuit tombe....
            Sabine, un jour,
      A tout donné--sa beauté de colombe,
            Et son amour--
      Pour l'anneau d'or du Comte de Soldagne,
            Pour un bijou....
      _La vent qui vient à travers la montagne
            M'a rendu fou!_'"


Behold our three musketeers of the brush once more reunited in Paris,
famous, after long years.

In emulation of the good Dumas, we will call it "cinq ans après." It was
a little more.

Taffy stands for Porthos and Athos rolled into one, since he is big and
good-natured, and strong enough to "assommer un homme d'un coup de
poing," and also stately and solemn, of aristocratic and romantic
appearance, and not too fat--not too much ongbong-pwang, as the Laird
called it--and also he does not dislike a bottle of wine, or even two,
and looks as if he had a history.

The Laird, of course, is d'Artagnan, since he sells his pictures well,
and by the time we are writing of has already become an Associate of the
Royal Academy; like Quentin Durward, this d'Artagnan was a Scotsman:

    "Ah, was na he a Roguy, this piper of Dundee!"

And Little Billee, the dainty friend of duchesses, must stand for
Aramis, I fear! It will not do to push the simile too far; besides,
unlike the good Dumas, one has a conscience. One does not play ducks and
drakes with historical facts, or tamper with historical personages. And
if Athos, Porthos & Co. are not historical by this time, I should like
to know who are!

Well, so are Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee--_tout ce qu'il y a de
plus historiques_!

Our three friends, well groomed, frock-coated, shirt-collared within an
inch of their lives, duly scarfed and scarf-pinned, chimney-pot-hatted,
and most beautifully trousered, and balmorally booted, or neatly spatted
(or whatever was most correct at the time), are breakfasting together on
coffee, rolls, and butter at a little round table in the huge court-yard
of an immense caravanserai, paved with asphalt, and covered in at the
top with a glazed roof that admits the sun and keeps out the rain--and
the air.

A magnificent old man as big as Taffy, in black velvet coat and breeches
and black silk stockings, and a large gold chain round his neck and
chest, looks down like Jove from a broad flight of marble steps--as
though to welcome the coming guests, who arrive in cabs and railway
omnibuses through a huge archway on the boulevard, or to speed those who
part through a lesser archway opening on to a side street.

"Bon voyage, messieurs et dames!"

At countless other little tables other voyagers are breakfasting or
ordering breakfast; or, having breakfasted, are smoking and chatting and
looking about. It is a babel of tongues--the cheerfulest, busiest,
merriest scene in the world, apparently the costly place of rendezvous
for all wealthy Europe and America; an atmosphere of bank-notes and
gold.

Already Taffy has recognized (and been recognized by) half a dozen old
fellow-Crimeans, of unmistakable military aspect like himself; and three
canny Scotsmen have discreetly greeted the Laird; and as for Little
Billee, he is constantly jumping up from his breakfast and running to
this table or that, drawn by some irresistible British smile of
surprised and delighted female recognition: "What, _you_ here? How nice!
Come over to hear la Svengali, I suppose."

At the top of the marble steps is a long terrace, with seats and people
sitting, from which tall glazed doors, elaborately carved and gilded,
give access to luxurious drawing-rooms, dining-rooms, reading-rooms,
lavatories, postal and telegraph offices; and all round and about are
huge square green boxes, out of which grow tropical and exotic
evergreens all the year round--with beautiful names that I have
forgotten. And leaning against these boxes are placards announcing what
theatrical or musical entertainments will take place in Paris that day
or night; and the biggest of these placards (and the most
fantastically decorated) informs the cosmopolite world that Madame
Svengali intends to make her first appearance in Paris that very
evening, at nine punctually, in the Cirque des Bashibazoucks, Rue St.
Honoré!

[Illustration: "AN ATMOSPHERE OF BANK-NOTES AND GOLD"]

Our friends had only arrived the previous night, but they had managed to
secure stalls a week beforehand. No places were any longer to be got for
love or money. Many people had come to Paris on purpose to hear la
Svengali--many famous musicians from England and everywhere else--but
they would have to wait many days.

The fame of her was like a rolling snowball that had been rolling all
over Europe for the last two years--wherever there was snow to be picked
up in the shape of golden ducats.

Their breakfast over, Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee, cigar in
mouth, arm in arm, the huge Taffy in the middle (_comme autrefois_),
crossed the sunshiny boulevard into the shade, and went down the Rue de
la Paix, through the Place Vendôme and the Rue Castiglione to the Rue de
Rivoli--quite leisurely, and with a tender midriff-warming sensation of
freedom and delight at almost every step.

Arrived at the corner pastry-cook's, they finished the stumps of their
cigars as they looked at the well-remembered show in the window; then
they went in and had, Taffy a Madeleine, the Laird a baba, and Little
Billee a Savarin--and each, I regret to say, a liqueur-glass of _rhum de
la Jamaïque_.

After this they sauntered through the Tuileries Gardens, and by the quay
to their favorite Pont des Arts, and looked up and down the
river--_comme autrefois_!

It is an enchanting prospect at any time and under any circumstances;
but on a beautiful morning in mid-October, when you haven't seen it for
five years, and are still young! and almost every stock and stone that
meets your eye, every sound, every scent, has some sweet and subtle
reminder for you--

Let the reader have no fear. I will not attempt to describe it. I
shouldn't know where to begin (nor when to leave off!).

Not but what many changes had been wrought; many old landmarks were
missing. And among them, as they found out a few minutes later, and much
to their chagrin, the good old Morgue!

They inquired of a _gardien de la paix_, who told them that a new
Morgue--"une bien jolie Morgue, ma foi!"--and much more commodious and
comfortable than the old one, had been built beyond Notre Dame, a little
to the right.

"Messieurs devraient voir ça--on y est très bien!"

But Notre Dame herself was still there, and la Sainte Chapelle, and Le
Pont Neuf, and the equestrian statue of Henri IV. _C'est toujours ça!_

And as they gazed and gazed, each framed unto himself, mentally, a
little picture of the Thames they had just left--and thought of Waterloo
Bridge, and St. Paul's, and London--but felt no homesickness whatever,
no desire to go back!

And looking down the river westward there was but little change.

On the left-hand side the terraces and garden of the Hôtel de la
Rochemartel (the sculptured entrance of which was in the Rue de Lille)
still overtopped the neighboring houses and shaded the quay with tall
trees, whose lightly falling leaves yellowed the pavement for at least a
hundred yards of frontage--or backage, rather; for this was but the rear
of that stately palace.

[Illustration: "A LITTLE PICTURE OF THE THAMES"]

"I wonder if l'Zouzou has come into his dukedom yet?" said Taffy.

And Taffy the realist, Taffy the modern of moderns, also said many
beautiful things about old historical French dukedoms; which, in spite
of their plentifulness, were so much more picturesque than English ones,
and constituted a far more poetical and romantic link with the past;
partly on account of their beautiful, high-sounding names!

"Amaury de Brissac de Roncesvaulx de la Rochemartel-Boisségur was a
generous mouthful! Why, the very sound of it is redolent of the twelfth
century! Not even Howard of Norfolk can beat that!"

For Taffy was getting sick of "this ghastly thin-faced time of ours," as
he sadly called it (quoting from a strange and very beautiful poem
called "Faustine," which had just appeared in the _Spectator_--and which
our three enthusiasts already knew by heart), and beginning to love all
things that were old and regal and rotten and forgotten and of bad
repute, and to long to paint them just as they really were.

"Ah! they managed these things better in France, especially in the
twelfth century, and even the thirteenth!" said the Laird. "Still,
Howard of Norfolk isn't bad at a pinch--_fote de myoo_!" he continued,
winking at Little Billee. And they promised themselves that they would
leave cards on Zouzou, and, if he wasn't a duke, invite him to dinner;
and also Dodor, if they could manage to find him.

Then along the quay and up the Rue de Seine, and by well-remembered
little mystic ways to the old studio in the Place St. Anatole des Arts.

Here they found many changes: A row of new houses on the north side, by
Baron Haussmann--the well-named; a boulevard was being constructed right
through the place; but the old house had been respected, and, looking
up, they saw the big north window of their good old abode blindless and
blank and black but for a white placard in the middle of it with the
words: "À louer. Un atelier, et une chambre à coucher."

They entered the court-yard through the little door in the porte
cochère, and beheld Madame Vinard standing on the step of her loge, her
arms akimbo, giving orders to her husband--who was sawing logs for
firewood, as usual at that time of the year--and telling him he was the
most helpless log of the lot.

She gave them one look, threw up her arms, and rushed at them, saying,
"Ah, mon Dieu! les trois Angliches!"

And they could not have complained of any lack of warmth in her
greeting, or in Monsieur Vinard's.

"Ah! mais quel bonheur de vous revoir! Et comme vous avez bonne mine,
tous! Et Monsieur Litrebili, donc! il a grandi!" etc., etc. "Mais vous
allez boire la goutte avant tout--vite, Vinard! Le ratafia de cassis que
Monsieur Durien nous a envoyé la semaine dernière!"

And they were taken into the loge and made free of it--welcomed like
prodigal sons; a fresh bottle of black-currant brandy was tapped, and
did duty for the fatted calf. It was an ovation, and made quite a stir
in the quartier.

_Le Retour des trois Angliches--cinq ans après!_

She told them all the news: about Bouchardy; Papelard; Jules Guinot, who
was now in the Ministère de la Guerre; Barizel, who had given up the
arts and gone into his father's business (umbrellas); Durien, who had
married six months ago, and had a superb atelier in the Rue Taitbout,
and was coining money; about her own family--Aglaë, who was going to be
married to the son of the charbonnier at the corner of the Rue de la
Canicule--"un bon mariage; bien solide!" Niniche, who was studying the
piano at the Conservatoire, and had won the silver medal; Isidore, who,
alas! had gone to the bad--"perdu par les femmes! un si joli garçon,
vous concevez! ça ne lui a pas porté bonheur, par exemple!" And yet she
was proud! and said his father would never have had the pluck!

"À dix-huit ans, pensez donc!

"And that good Monsieur Carrel; he is dead, you know! Ah, messieurs
savaient ça? Yes, he died at Dieppe, his natal town, during the winter,
from the consequences of an indigestion--que voulez-vous! He always had
the stomach so feeble!... Ah! the beautiful interment, messieurs! Five
thousand people, in spite of the rain! Car il pleuvait averse! And M. le
Maire and his adjunct walking behind the hearse, and the gendarmerie and
the douaniers, and a bataillon of the douzième chasseurs-à-pied, with
their music, and all the sapper-pumpers, en grande tenue with their
beautiful brass helmets! All the town was there, following: so there was
nobody left to see the procession go by! q'c'était beau! Mon Dieu,
q'c'était beau! c'que j'ai pleuré, d'voir ça! n'est-ce-pas, Vinard?"

"Dame, oui, ma biche! j'crois ben! It might have been Monsieur le Maire
himself that one was interring in person!"

"Ah, ça! voyons, Vinard; thou'rt not going to compare the Maire of
Dieppe to a painter like Monsieur Carrel?"

"Certainly not, ma biche! But still, M. Carrel was a great man all the
same, in his way. Besides, I wasn't there--nor thou either, as to that!"

"Mon Dieu! comme il est idiot, ce Vinard--of a stupidity to cut with a
knife! Why, thou might'st almost be a Mayor thyself, sacred imbecile
that thou art!"

And an animated discussion arose between husband and wife as to the
respective merits of a country mayor on one side and a famous painter
and member of the Institute on the other, during which _les trois
Angliches_ were left out in the cold. When Madame Vinard had
sufficiently routed her husband, which did not take very long, she
turned to them again, and told them that she had started a _magasin de
bric-à-brac_, "vous verres ça!"

Yes, the studio had been to let for three months. Would they like to see
it? Here were the keys. They would, of course, prefer to see it by
themselves, alone; "je comprends ça! et vous verrez ce que vous verrez!"
Then they must come and drink once more again the drop, and inspect her
_magasin de bric-à-brac_.

So they went up, all three, and let themselves into the old place where
they had been so happy--and one of them for a while so miserable!

It was changed indeed.

Bare of all furniture, for one thing; shabby and unswept, with a
pathetic air of dilapidation, spoliation, desecration, and a musty,
shut-up smell; the window so dirty you could hardly see the new houses
opposite; the floor a disgrace!

All over the walls were caricatures in charcoal and white chalk, with
more or less incomprehensible legends; very vulgar and trivial and
coarse, some of them, and pointless for _trois Angliches_.

[Illustration: "'AH! THE BEAUTIFUL INTERMENT, MESSIEURS!'"]

But among these (touching to relate) they found, under a square of
plate-glass that had been fixed on the wall by means of an oak frame,
Little Billee's old black-and-white-and-red chalk sketch of Trilby's
left foot, as fresh as if it had been done only yesterday! Over it was
written: "Souvenir de la Grande Trilby, par W. B. (Litrebili)." And
beneath, carefully engrossed on imperishable parchment, and pasted on
the glass, the following stanzas:

     "Pauvre Trilby--la belle et bonne et chère!
      Je suis son pied. Devine qui voudra
      Quel tendre ami, la chérissant naguère,
      Encadra d'elle (et d'un amour sincère)
    Ce souvenir charmant qu'un caprice inspira--
              Qu'un souffle emportera!

     "J'étais jumeau: qu'est devenu mon frère?
      Hélas! Hélas! L'Amour nous égara.
      L'Éternité nous unira, j'espère;
      Et nous ferons comme autrefois la paire
    Au fond d'un lit bien chaste où nul ne troublera
              Trilby--qui dormira.

     "Ô tendre ami, sans nous qu'allez-vous faire?
      La porte est close où Trilby demeura.
      Le Paradis est loin ... et sur la terre
      (Qui nous fut douce et lui sera légère)
    Pour trouver nos pareils, si bien qu'on cherchera--
              Beau chercher l'on aura!"

Taffy drew a long breath into his manly bosom, and kept it there as he
read this characteristic French doggerel (for so he chose to call this
touching little symphony in _ère_ and _ra_). His huge frame thrilled
with tenderness and pity and fond remembrance, and he said to himself
(letting out his breath): "Dear, dear Trilby! Ah! if you had only cared
for _me_, _I_ wouldn't have let you give me up--not for any one on
earth. _You_ were the mate for _me_!"

[Illustration: "PAUVRE TRILBY"]

And that, as the reader has guessed long ago, was big Taffy's "history."

The Laird was also deeply touched, and could not speak. Had he been in
love with Trilby, too? Had he ever been in love with any one?

He couldn't say. But he thought of Trilby's sweetness and unselfishness,
her gayety, her innocent kissings and caressings, her drollery and
frolicsome grace, her way of filling whatever place she was in with her
presence, the charming sight and the genial sound of her; and felt that
no girl, no woman, no lady he had ever seen yet was a match for this
poor waif and stray, this long-legged, cancan-dancing, quartier-latin
grisette, blanchisseuse de fin, "and Heaven knows what besides!"

"Hang it all!" he mentally ejaculated, "I wish to goodness I'd married
her _myself_!"

Little Billee said nothing either. He felt unhappier than he had ever
once felt for five long years--to think that he could gaze on such a
memento as this, a thing so strongly personal to himself, with dry eyes
and a quiet pulse! and he unemotionally, dispassionately, wished himself
dead and buried for at least the thousand and first time!

All three possessed casts of Trilby's hands and feet and photographs of
herself. But nothing so charmingly suggestive of Trilby as this little
masterpiece of a true artist, this happy fluke of a happy moment. It was
Trilbyness itself, as the Laird thought, and should not be suffered to
perish.

They took the keys back to Madame Vinard in silence.

She said: "Vous avez vu--n'est-ce pas, messieurs?--le pied de Trilby!
c'est bien gentil! C'est Monsieur Durien qui a fait mettre le verre,
quand vous êtes partis; et Monsieur Guinot qui a composé _l'épitaphe_.
Pauvre Trilby! qu'est-ce qu'elle est devenue! comme elle était bonne
fille, hein? et si belle! et comme elle était vive elle était vive elle
était vive! Et comme elle vous aimait tous bien--et surtout Monsieur
Litrebili--n'est-ce pas?"

Then she insisted on giving them each another liqueur-glass of Durien's
ratafia de cassis, and took them to see her collection of bric-à-brac
across the yard, a gorgeous show, and explained everything about it--how
she had begun in quite a small way, but was making it a big business.

"Voyez cette pendule! It is of the time of Louis Onze, who gave it with
his own hands to Madame de Pompadour(!). I bought it at a sale in--"

"Combiang?" said the Laird.

"C'est cent-cinquante francs, monsieur--c'est bien bon marché--une
véritable occasion, et--"

"Je prong!" said the Laird, meaning "I take it!"

Then she showed them a beautiful brocade gown "which she had picked up
at a bargain at--"

"Combiang?" said the Laird.

"Ah, ça, c'est trois cents francs, monsieur. Mais--"

"Je prong!" said the Laird.

"Et voici les souliers qui vont avec, et que--"

"Je pr--"

But here Taffy took the Laird by the arm and dragged him by force out
of this too seductive siren's cave.

The Laird told her where to send his purchases; and with many
expressions of love and good-will on both sides, they tore themselves
away from Monsieur et Madame Vinard.

The Laird, however, rushed back for a minute, and hurriedly whispered to
Madame Vinard: "Oh--er--le piay de Trilby--sur le mure, vous savvy--avec
le verre et toot le reste--coopy le mure--comprenny?... Combiang?"

"Ah, monsieur!" said Madame Vinard--"c'est un peu difficile, vous
savez--couper un mur comme ça! On parlera au propriétaire si vous
voulez, et ça pourrait peut-être s'arranger, si c'est en bois! seulement
il fau--"

"Je prong!" said the Laird, and waved his hand in farewell.

[Illustration: "'JE PRONG!'"]

They went up the Rue Vieille des Mauvais Ladres, and found that about
twenty yards of a high wall had been pulled down--just at the bend where
the Laird had seen the last of Trilby, as she turned round and kissed
her hand to him--and they beheld, within, a quaint and ancient
long-neglected garden; a gray old garden, with tall, warty, black-boled
trees, and damp, green, mossy paths that lost themselves under the brown
and yellow leaves and mould and muck which had drifted into heaps here
and there, the accumulation of years--a queer old faded pleasance, with
wasted bowers and dilapidated carved stone benches and weather-beaten
discolored marble statues--noseless, armless, earless fauns and
hamadryads! And at the end of it, in a tumble-down state of utter ruin,
a still inhabited little house, with shabby blinds and window-curtains,
and broken window-panes mended with brown paper--a Pavillon de Flore,
that must have been quite beautiful a hundred years ago--the once
mysterious love-resort of long-buried abbés with light hearts, and
well-forgotten lords and ladies gay--red-heeled, patched, powdered,
frivolous, and shameless, but oh! how charming to the imagination of
the nineteenth century! And right through the ragged lawn, (where lay,
upset in the long dewy grass, a broken doll's perambulator by a tattered
Punchinello) went a desecrating track made by cart-wheels and horses'
hoofs; and this, no doubt, was to be a new street--perhaps, as Taffy
suggested, "La Rue _Neuve_ des Mauvais Ladres!" (The _New_ Street of the
Bad Lepers!).

"Ah, Taffy!" sententiously opined the Laird, with his usual wink at
Little Billee, "I've no doubt the _old_ lepers were the best, bad as
they were!"

"I'm quite _sure_ of it!" said Taffy, with sad and sober conviction and
a long-drawn sigh. "I only wish I had a chance of painting one--just as
he really was!"

How often they had speculated on what lay hidden behind that lofty old
brick wall! and now this melancholy little peep into the once festive
past, the touching sight of this odd old poverty-stricken abode of
Heaven knows what present grief and desolation, which a few strokes of
the pickaxe had laid bare, seemed to chime in with their own gray mood
that had been so bright and sunny an hour ago; and they went on their
way quite dejectedly, for a stroll through the Luxembourg Gallery and
Gardens.

The same people seemed to be still copying the same pictures in the
long, quiet, genial room, so pleasantly smelling of oil-paint--Rosa
Bonheur's "Labourage Nivernais"--Hébert's "Malaria"--Couture's "Decadent
Romans."

And in the formal dusty gardens were the same pioupious and zouzous
still walking with the same nounous, or sitting by their sides on
benches by formal ponds with gold and silver fish in them--and just the
same old couples petting the same toutous and loulous![A]

[A] _Glossary._--Pioupiou (_alias_ pousse-caillou, _alias_
tourlourou)--a private soldier of the line. Zouzou--a Zouave. Nounou--a
wet-nurse with a pretty ribboned cap and long streamers. Toutou--a
nondescript French lapdog, of no breed known to Englishmen (a regular
little beast!) Loulou--a Pomeranian dog--not much better.

Then they thought they would go and lunch at le père Trin's--the
Restaurant de la Couronne, in the Rue du Luxembourg--for the sake of
auld lang syne! But when they got there the well-remembered fumes of
that humble refectory, which had once seemed not unappetizing, turned
their stomachs. So they contented themselves with warmly greeting le
père Trin, who was quite overjoyed to see them again, and anxious to
turn the whole establishment topsy-turvy that he might entertain such
guests as they deserved.

Then the Laird suggested an omelet at the Café de l'Odéon. But Taffy
said, in his masterful way, "Damn the Café de l'Odéon!"

And hailing a little open fly, they drove to Ledoyen's, or some such
place, in the Champs Élysées, where they feasted as became three
prosperous Britons out for a holiday in Paris--three irresponsible
musketeers, lords of themselves and Lutetia, _beati possidentes!_--and
afterwards had themselves driven in an open carriage and pair through
the Bois de Boulogne to the fête de St. Cloud (or what still remained of
it, for it lasts six weeks), the scene of so many of Dodor's and
Zouzou's exploits in past years, and found it more amusing than the
Luxembourg Gardens; the lively and irrepressible spirit of Dodor seemed
to pervade it still.

But it doesn't want the presence of a Dodor to make the blue-bloused
sons of the Gallic people (and its neatly shod, white-capped daughters)
delightful to watch as they take their pleasure. And the Laird (thinking
perhaps of Hampstead Heath on an Easter Monday) must not be blamed for
once more quoting his favorite phrase--the pretty little phrase with
which the most humorous and least exemplary of British parsons began his
famous journey to France.

When they came back to the hotel to dress and dine, the Laird found he
wanted a pair of white gloves for the concert--"Oon pair de gong blong,"
as he called it--and they walked along the boulevards till they came to
a haberdasher's shop of very good and prosperous appearance, and, going
in, were received graciously by the "patron," a portly little bourgeois,
who waved them to a tall and aristocratic and very well dressed young
commis behind the counter, saying, "Une paire de gants blancs pour
monsieur."

And what was the surprise of our three friends in recognizing Dodor!

The gay Dodor, Dodor l'irrésistible, quite unembarrassed by his
position, was exuberant in his delight at seeing them again, and
introduced them to the patron and his wife and daughter, Monsieur,
Madame, and Mademoiselle Passefil. And it soon became pretty evident
that, in spite of his humble employment in that house, he was a great
favorite in that family, and especially with mademoiselle.

[Illustration: "'OON PAIR DE GONG BLONG'"]

Indeed, Monsieur Passefil invited our three heroes to stay and dine then
and there; but they compromised matters by asking Dodor to come and dine
with _them_ at the hotel, and he accepted with alacrity.

Thanks to Dodor, the dinner was a very lively one, and they soon forgot
the regretful impressions of the day.

They learned that he hadn't got a penny in the world, and had left the
army, and had for two years kept the books at le père Passefil's and
served his customers, and won his good opinion and his wife's, and
especially his daughter's; and that soon he was to be not only his
employer's partner, but his son-in-law; and that, in spite of his
impecuniosity, he had managed to impress them with the fact that in
marrying a Rigolot de Lafarce she was making a very splendid match
indeed!

His brother-in-law, the Honorable Jack Reeve, had long cut him for a bad
lot. But his sister, after a while, had made up her mind that to marry
Mlle. Passefil wasn't the worst he could do; at all events, it would
keep him out of England, and _that_ was a comfort! And passing through
Paris, she had actually called on the Passefil family, and they had
fallen prostrate before such splendor; and no wonder, for Mrs. Jack
Reeve was one of the most beautiful, elegant, and fashionable women in
London, the smartest of the smart.

"And how about l'Zouzou?" asked Little Billee.

"Ah, old Gontran! I don't see much of him. We no longer quite move in
the same circles, you know; not that he's proud, or me either! but he's
a sub-lieutenant in the Guides--an officer! Besides, his brother's
dead, and he's the Duc de la Rochemartel, and a special pet of the
Empress; he makes her laugh more than anybody! He's looking out for the
biggest heiress he can find, and he's pretty safe to catch her, with
such a name as that! In fact, they say he's caught her already--Miss
Lavinia Hunks, of Chicago. Twenty million dollars!--at least, so the
_Figaro_ says!"

Then he gave them news of other old friends; and they did not part till
it was time for them to go to the Cirque des Bashibazoucks, and after
they had arranged to dine with his future family on the following day.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Rue St. Honoré was a long double file of cabs and carriages
slowly moving along to the portals of that huge hall, Le Cirque des
Bashibazoucks. Is it there still, I wonder? I don't mind betting not!
Just at this period of the Second Empire there was a mania for
demolition and remolition (if there is such a word), and I have no doubt
my Parisian readers would search the Rue St. Honoré for the Salle des
Bashibazoucks in vain!

Our friends were shown to their stalls, and looked round in surprise.
This was before the days of the Albert Hall, and they had never been in
such a big place of the kind before, or one so regal in aspect, so
gorgeously imperial with white and gold and crimson velvet, so dazzling
with light, so crammed with people from floor to roof, and cramming
itself still.

A platform carpeted with crimson cloth had been erected in front of the
gates where the horses had once used to come in, and their fair riders,
and the two jolly English clowns; and the beautiful nobleman with the
long frock-coat and brass buttons, and soft high boots, and four-in-hand
whip--"la chambrière."

In front of this was a lower stand for the orchestra. The circus itself
was filled with stalls--stalles d'orchestre. A pair of crimson curtains
hid the entrance to the platform at the back, and by each of these stood
a small page, ready to draw it aside and admit the diva.

The entrance to the orchestra was by a small door under the platform,
and some thirty or forty chairs and music-stands, grouped around the
conductor's estrade, were waiting for the band.

Little Billee looked round, and recognized many countrymen and
countrywomen of his own--many great musical celebrities especially, whom
he had often met in London. Tiers upon tiers of people rose up all round
in a widening circle, and lost themselves in a dazy mist of light at the
top--it was like a picture by Martin! In the imperial box were the
English ambassador and his family, with an august British personage
sitting in the middle, in front, his broad blue ribbon across his breast
and his opera-glass to his royal eyes.

Little Billee had never felt so excited, so exhilarated by such a show
before, nor so full of eager anticipation. He looked at his programme,
and saw that the Hungarian band (the first that had yet appeared in
western Europe, I believe) would play an overture of gypsy dances. Then
Madame Svengali would sing "un air connu, sans accompagnement," and
afterwards other airs, including the "Nussbaum" of Schumann (for the
first time in Paris, it seemed). Then a rest of ten minutes; then more
csárdás; then the diva would sing "Malbrouck s'en va-t'en guerre," of
all things in the world! and finish up with "un impromptu de Chopin,
sans paroles."

Truly a somewhat incongruous bill of fare!

[Illustration: GECKO]

Close on the stroke of nine the musicians came in and took their seats.
They were dressed in the foreign hussar uniform that has now become so
familiar. The first violin had scarcely sat down before friends
recognized in him their old friend Gecko.

Just as the clock struck, Svengali, in irreproachable evening dress,
tall and stout and quite splendid in appearance, notwithstanding his
long black mane (which had been curled), took his place at his desk. Our
friends would have known him at a glance, in spite of the wonderful
alteration time and prosperity had wrought in his outward man.

He bowed right and left to the thunderous applause that greeted him,
gave his three little baton-taps, and the lovely music began at once. We
have grown accustomed to strains of this kind during the last twenty
years; but they were new then, and their strange seduction was a
surprise as well as an enchantment.

Besides, no such band as Svengali's had ever been heard; and in
listening to this overture the immense crowd almost forgot that it was a
mere preparation for a great musical event, and tried to encore it. But
Svengali merely turned round and bowed--there were to be no encores that
night.

Then a moment of silence and breathless suspense--curiosity on tiptoe!

Then the two little page-boys each drew a silken rope, and the curtains
parted and looped themselves up on each side symmetrically; and a tall
female figure appeared, clad in what seemed like a classical dress of
cloth of gold, embroidered with garnets and beetles' wings; her snowy
arms and shoulders bare, a gold coronet of stars on her head, her thick
light brown hair tied behind and flowing all down her back to nearly her
knees, like those ladies in hair-dressers' shops who sit with their
backs to the plate-glass windows to advertise the merits of some
particular hair-wash.

She walked slowly down to the front, her hands hanging at her sides in
quite a simple fashion, and made a slight inclination of her head and
body towards the imperial box, and then to right and left. Her lips and
cheeks were rouged; her dark level eyebrows nearly met at the bridge of
her short high nose. Through her parted lips you could see her large
glistening white teeth; her gray eyes looked straight at Svengali.

Her face was thin, and had a rather haggard expression, in spite of its
artificial freshness; but its contour was divine, and its character so
tender, so humble, so touchingly simple and sweet, that one melted at
the sight of her. No such magnificent or seductive apparition has ever
been seen before or since on any stage or platform--not even Miss Ellen
Terry as the priestess of Artemis in the late Laureate's play, "The
Cup."

The house rose at her as she came down to the front; and she bowed again
to right and left, and put her hand to her heart quite simply and with a
most winning natural gesture, an adorable gaucherie--like a graceful and
unconscious school-girl, quite innocent of stage deportment.

_It was Trilby!_

       *       *       *       *       *

Trilby the tone-deaf, who couldn't sing one single note in tune! Trilby,
who couldn't tell a C from an F!!

What was going to happen!

Our three friends were almost turned to stone in the immensity of their
surprise.

Yet the big Taffy was trembling all over; the Laird's jaw had all but
fallen on to his chest; Little Billee was staring, staring his eyes
almost out of his head. There was something, to them, so strange and
uncanny about it all; so oppressive, so anxious, so momentous!

The applause had at last subsided. Trilby stood with her hands behind
her, one foot (the left one) on a little stool that had been left there
on purpose, her lips parted, her eyes on Svengali's, ready to begin.

He gave his three beats, and the band struck a chord. Then, at another
beat from him, but in her direction, she began, without the slightest
appearance of effort, without any accompaniment whatever, he still
beating time--conducting her, in fact, just as if she had been an
orchestra herself:

    "Au clair de la lune,
       Mon ami Pierrot!
     Prête-moi ta plume
       Pour écrire un mot.
     Ma chandelle est morte ...
       Je n'ai plus de feu!
     Ouvre-moi ta porte
       Pour l'amour de Dieu!"

This was the absurd old nursery rhyme with which la Svengali chose to
make her début before the most critical audience in the world! She sang
it three times over--the same verse. There is but one.

The first time she sang it without any expression whatever--not the
slightest. Just the words and the tune; in the middle of her voice, and
not loud at all; just as a child sings who is thinking of something
else; or just as a young French mother sings who is darning socks by a
cradle, and rocking her baby to sleep with her foot.

But her voice was so immense in its softness, richness, freshness, that
it seemed to be pouring itself out from all round; its intonation
absolutely, mathematically pure; one felt it to be not only faultless,
but infallible; and the seduction, the novelty of it, the strangely
sympathetic quality! How can one describe the quality of a peach or a
nectarine to those who have only known apples?

Until la Svengali appeared, the world had only known apples--Catalanis,
Jenny Linds, Grisis, Albonis, Pattis! The best apples that can be, for
sure--but still only apples!

[Illustration: "AU CLAIR DE LA LUNE"]

If she had spread a pair of large white wings and gracefully fluttered
up to the roof and perched upon the chandelier, she could not have
produced a greater sensation. The like of that voice has never been
heard, nor ever will be again. A woman archangel might sing like that,
or some enchanted princess out of a fairy-tale.

Little Billee had already dropped his face into his hands and hid his
eyes in his pocket-handkerchief; a big tear had fallen on to Taffy's
left whisker; the Laird was trying hard to keep his tears back.

She sang the verse a second time, with but little added expression and
no louder; but with a sort of breathy widening of her voice that made it
like a broad heavenly smile of universal motherhood turned into sound.
One felt all the genial gayety and grace and impishness of Pierrot and
Columbine idealized into frolicsome beauty and holy innocence, as though
they were performing for the saints in Paradise--a baby Columbine, with
a cherub for clown! The dream of it all came over you for a second or
two--a revelation of some impossible golden age--priceless--never to be
forgotten! How on earth did she do it?

Little Billee had lost all control over himself, and was shaking with
his suppressed sobs--Little Billee, who hadn't shed a single tear for
five long years! Half the people in the house were in tears, but tears
of sheer delight, of delicate inner laughter.

Then she came back to earth, and saddened and veiled and darkened her
voice as she sang the verse for the third time; and it was a great and
sombre tragedy, too deep for any more tears; and somehow or other poor
Columbine, forlorn and betrayed and dying, out in the cold at
midnight--sinking down to hell, perhaps--was making her last frantic
appeal! It was no longer Pierrot and Columbine--it was Marguerite--it
was Faust! It was the most terrible and pathetic of all possible human
tragedies, but expressed with no dramatic or histrionic exaggeration of
any sort; by mere tone, slight, subtle changes in the quality of the
sound--too quick and elusive to be taken count of, but to be felt with,
oh, what poignant sympathy!

When the song was over the applause did not come immediately, and she
waited with her kind wide smile, as if she were well accustomed to wait
like this; and then the storm began, and grew and spread and rattled and
echoed--voice, hands, feet, sticks, umbrellas!--and down came the
bouquets, which the little page-boys picked up; and Trilby bowed to
front and right and left in her simple _débonnaire_ fashion. It was her
usual triumph. It had never failed, whatever the audience, whatever the
country, whatever the song.

Little Billee didn't applaud. He sat with his head in his hands, his
shoulders still heaving. He believed himself to be fast asleep and in a
dream, and was trying his utmost not to wake; for a great happiness was
his. It was one of those nights to be marked with a white stone!

As the first bars of the song came pouring out of her parted lips (whose
shape he so well remembered), and her dovelike eyes looked straight over
Svengali's head, straight in his own direction--nay, _at_ him--something
melted in his brain, and all his long-lost power of loving came back
with a rush.

It was like the sudden curing of a deafness that has been lasting for
years. The doctor blows through your nose into your Eustachian tube with
a little India-rubber machine; some obstacle gives way, there is a snap
in your head, and straightway you hear better than you had ever heard in
all your life, almost too well; and all your life is once more changed
for you!

At length he sat up again, in the middle of la Svengali's singing of the
"Nussbaum," and saw her; and saw the Laird sitting by him, and Taffy,
their eyes riveted on Trilby, and knew for certain that it was _no_
dream this time, and his joy was almost a pain!

[Illustration:

    "OUVRE-MOI TA PORTE
      POUR L'AMOUR DE DIEU!"
]

She sang the "Nussbaum" (to its heavenly accompaniment) as simply as she
had sung the previous song. Every separate note was a highly finished
gem of sound, linked to the next by a magic bond.

You did not require to be a lover of music to fall beneath the spell of
such a voice as that; the mere melodic phrase had all but ceased to
matter. Her phrasing, consummate as it was, was as simple as a child's.

It was as if she said: "See! what does the composer count for? Here is
about as beautiful a song as was ever written, with beautiful words to
match, and the words have been made French for you by one of your
smartest poets! But what do the words signify, any more than the tune,
or even the language? The 'Nussbaum' is neither better nor worse than
'Mon ami Pierrot' when _I_ am the singer; for I am _Svengali_; and you
shall hear nothing, see nothing, think of nothing but _Svengali,
Svengali, Svengali_!"

It was the apotheosis of voice and virtuosity! It was "il bel canto"
come back to earth after a hundred years--the bel canto of Vivarelli,
let us say, who sang the same song every night to the same King of Spain
for a quarter of a century, and was rewarded with a dukedom, and wealth
beyond the dreams of avarice.

And, indeed, here was this immense audience, made up of the most
cynically critical people in the world, and the most anti-German,
assisting with rapt ears and streaming eyes at the imagined spectacle of
a simple German damsel, a Mädchen, a Fräulein, just "verlobte"--a future
Hausfrau--sitting under a walnut-tree in some suburban garden--à
Berlin!--and around her her family and their friends, probably drinking
beer and smoking long porcelain pipes, and talking politics or business,
and cracking innocent elaborate old German jokes; with bated breath,
lest they should disturb her maiden dream of love! And all as though it
were a scene in Elysium, and the Fräulein a nymph of many-fountained
Ida, and her people Olympian gods and goddesses.

And such, indeed, they were when Trilby sang of them!

After this, when the long, frantic applause had subsided, she made a
gracious bow to the royal British opera-glass (which had never left her
face), and sang "Ben Bolt" in English!

And then Little Billee remembered there was such a person as Svengali in
the world, and recalled his little flexible flageolet!

"That is how I teach Gecko; that is how I teach la bedite Honorine; that
is how I teach il bel canto.... It was lost, il bel canto--and I found
it in a dream--I, Svengali!"

And his old cosmic vision of the beauty and sadness of things, the very
heart of them, and their pathetic evanescence, came back with a tenfold
clearness--that heavenly glimpse beyond the veil! And with it a crushing
sense of his own infinitesimal significance by the side of this glorious
pair of artists, one of whom had been his friend and the other his
love--a love who had offered to be his humble mistress and slave, not
feeling herself good enough to be his wife!

It made him sick and faint to remember, and filled him with hot shame,
and then and there his love for Trilby became as that of a dog for its
master!

She sang once more--"Chanson de Printemps," by Gounod (who was present,
and seemed very hysterical), and the first part of the concert was over,
and people had time to draw breath and talk over this new wonder, this
revelation of what the human voice could achieve; and an immense hum
filled the hall--astonishment, enthusiasm, ecstatic delight!

But our three friends found little to say--for what _they_ felt there
were as yet no words!

[Illustration: "MALBROUCK S'EN VA-T'EN GUERRE"]

Taffy and the Laird looked at Little Billee, who seemed to be looking
inward at some transcendent dream of his own; with red eyes, and his
face all pale and drawn, and his nose very pink, and rather thicker than
usual; and the dream appeared to be out of the common blissful, though
his eyes were swimming still, for his smile was almost idiotic in its
rapture!

The second part of the concert was still shorter than the first, and
created, if possible, a wilder enthusiasm.

Trilby only sang twice.

Her first song was "Malbrouck s'en va-t'en guerre."

She began it quite lightly and merrily, like a jolly march; in the
middle of her voice, which had not as yet revealed any exceptional
compass or range. People laughed quite frankly at the first verse:

    "Malbrouck s'en va-t'en guerre--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Malbrouck s'en va-t'en guerre....
       Ne sais quand reviendra!
       Ne sais quand reviendra!
       Ne sais quand reviendra!"

The _mironton, mirontaine_ was the very essence of high martial resolve
and heroic self-confidence; one would have led a forlorn hope after
hearing it once!

    "Il reviendra-z-à Pâques--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Il reviendra-z-à Pâques....
       Ou ... à la Trinité!"

People still laughed, though the _mironton, mirontaine_ betrayed an
uncomfortable sense of the dawning of doubts and fears--vague
forebodings!

    "La Trinité se passe--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     La Trinité se passe....
       Malbrouck ne revient pas!"

And here, especially in the _mironton, mirontaine_, a note of anxiety
revealed itself--so poignant, so acutely natural and human, that it
became a personal anxiety of one's own, causing the heart to beat, and
one's breath was short.

    "Madame à sa tour monte--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Madame à sa tour monte,
       Si haut qu'elle peut monter!"

Oh! How one's heart went with her! Anne! Sister Anne! Do you see
anything?

    "Elle voit de loin son page--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Elle voit de loin son page,
       Tout de noir habillé!"

One is almost sick with the sense of impending calamity--it is all but
unbearable!

    "Mon page--mon beau page!--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Mon page--mon beau page!
       Quelles nouvelles apportez?"

And here Little Billee begins to weep again, and so does everybody else!
The _mironton, mirontaine_ is an agonized wail of suspense--poor
bereaved duchess!--poor Sarah Jennings! Did it all announce itself to
you just like that?

All this while the accompaniment had been quite simple--just a few
obvious ordinary chords.

But now, quite suddenly, without a single modulation or note of warning,
down goes the tune a full major third, from E to C--into the graver
depths of Trilby's great contralto--so solemn and ominous that there is
no more weeping, but the flesh creeps; the accompaniment slows and
elaborates itself; the march becomes a funeral march, with muted
strings, and quite slowly:

    "Aux nouvelles que j'apporte--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Aux nouvelles que j'apporte,
      Vos beaux yeux vont pleurer!"

Richer and richer grows the accompaniment. The _mironton, mirontaine_
becomes a dirge--

    "Quittez vos habits roses--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Quittez vos habits roses,
       Et vos satins brochés!"

Here the ding-donging of a big bell seems to mingle with the score; ...
and very slowly, and so impressively that the news will ring forever in
the ears and hearts of those who hear it from la Svengali's lips:

    "Le Sieur Malbrouck est mort--
       _Mironton, mironton, mirontaine!_
     Le Sieur--Malbrouck--est--mort!
       Est mort--et enterré!"

And thus it ends quite abruptly!

And this heart-rending tragedy, this great historical epic in two dozen
lines, at which some five or six thousand gay French people are
sniffling and mopping their eyes like so many Niobes, is just a common
old French comic song--a mere nursery ditty, like "Little Bo-peep"--to
the tune,

    "We won't go home till morning,
      Till daylight doth appear."

And after a second or two of silence (oppressive and impressive as that
which occurs at a burial when the handful of earth is being dropped on
the coffin-lid) the audience bursts once more into madness; and la
Svengali, who accepts no encores, has to bow for nearly five minutes,
standing amid a sea of flowers....

[Illustration:

    "AUX NOUVELLES QUE J'APPORTE,
      VOS BEAUX YEUX VONT PLEURER!"
]

Then comes her great and final performance. The orchestra swiftly plays
the first four bars of the bass in Chopin's Impromptu (A flat); and
suddenly, without words, as a light nymph catching the whirl of a double
skipping-rope, la Svengali breaks in, and vocalizes that astounding
piece of music that so few pianists can even play; but no pianist has
ever played it like this; no piano has ever given out such notes as
these!

Every single phrase is a string of perfect gems, of purest ray serene,
strung together on a loose golden thread! The higher and shriller she
sings, the sweeter it is; higher and shriller than any woman had ever
sung before.

Waves of sweet and tender laughter, the very heart and essence of
innocent, high-spirited girlhood, alive to all that is simple and joyous
and elementary in nature--the freshness of the morning, the ripple of
the stream, the click of the mill, the lisp of wind in the trees, the
song of the lark in the cloudless sky--the sun and the dew, the scent of
early flowers and summer woods and meadows--the sight of birds and bees
and butterflies and frolicsome young animals at play--all the sights and
scents and sounds that are the birthright of happy children, happy
savages in favored climes--things within the remembrance and the reach
of most of us! All this, the memory and the feel of it, are in Trilby's
voice as she warbles that long, smooth, lilting, dancing laugh, that
wondrous song without words; and those who hear feel it all, and
remember it with her. It is irresistible; it forces itself on you; no
words, no pictures, could ever do the like! So that the tears that are
shed out of all these many French eyes are tears of pure, unmixed
delight in happy reminiscence! (Chopin, it is true, may have meant
something quite different--a hot-house, perhaps, with orchids and arum
lilies and tuberoses and hydrangeas--but that is neither here nor
there.)

[Illustration: UN IMPROMPTU DE CHOPIN]

Then comes the slow movement, the sudden adagio, with its capricious
ornaments--the waking of the virgin heart, the stirring of the sap, the
dawn of love; its doubts and fears and questionings; and the mellow,
powerful, deep chest notes are like the pealing of great golden bells,
with a light little pearl shower tinkling round--drops from the upper
fringe of her grand voice as she shakes it....

Then back again the quick part, childhood once more, da capo, only
quicker! hurry, hurry! but distinct as ever. Loud and shrill and sweet
beyond compare--drowning the orchestra; of a piercing quality quite
ineffable; a joy there is no telling; a clear, purling, crystal stream
that gurgles and foams and bubbles along over sunlit stones; "a wonder,
a world's delight!"

And there is not a sign of effort, of difficulty overcome. All through,
Trilby smiles her broad, angelic smile; her lips well parted, her big
white teeth glistening as she gently jerks her head from side to side in
time to Svengali's bâton, as if to shake the willing notes out quicker
and higher and shriller....

And in a minute or two it is all over, like the lovely bouquet of
fireworks at the end of the show, and she lets what remains of it die
out and away like the afterglow of fading Bengal fires--her voice
receding into the distance--coming back to you like an echo from all
round, from anywhere you please--quite soft--hardly more than a breath;
but _such_ a breath! Then one last chromatically ascending rocket,
pianissimo, up to E in alt, and then darkness and silence!

And after a little pause the many-headed rises as one, and waves its
hats and sticks and handkerchiefs, and stamps and shouts.... "Vive la
Svengali! Vive la Svengali!"

Svengali steps on to the platform by his wife's side and kisses her
hand; and they both bow themselves backward through the curtains, which
fall, to rise again and again and again on this astounding pair!

Such was la Svengali's début in Paris.

It had lasted little over an hour, one quarter of which, at least, had
been spent in plaudits and courtesies!

The writer is no musician, alas! (as, no doubt, his musical readers have
found out by this) save in his thraldom to music of not too severe a
kind, and laments the clumsiness and inadequacy of this wild (though
somewhat ambitious) attempt to recall an impression received more than
thirty years ago; to revive the ever-blessed memory of that
unforgettable first night at the Cirque des Bashibazoucks.

Would that I could transcribe here Berlioz's famous series of twelve
articles, entitled "La Svengali," which were republished from _La Lyre
Éolienne_, and are now out of print!

Or Théophile Gautier's elaborate rhapsody, "Madame Svengali--Ange, ou
Femme?" in which he proves that one need not have a musical ear (he
hadn't) to be enslaved by such a voice as hers, any more than the eye
for beauty (this he _had_) to fall the victim of "her celestial form
and face." It is enough, he says, to be simply human! I forget in which
journal this eloquent tribute appeared; it is not to be found in his
collected works.

Or the intemperate diatribe by Herr Blagner (as I will christen him) on
the tyranny of the prima donna called "Svengalismus"; in which he
attempts to show that mere virtuosity carried to such a pitch is mere
viciosity--base acrobatismus of the vocal chords, a hysteric appeal to
morbid Gallic "sentimentalismus"; and that this monstrous development of
a phenomenal larynx, this degrading cultivation and practice of the
abnormalismus of a mere physical peculiarity, are death and destruction
to all true music; since they place Mozart and Beethoven, and even
_himself_, on a level with Bellini, Donizetti, Offenbach--any Italian
tune-tinkler, any ballad-monger of the hated Paris pavement! and can
make the highest music of all (even _his own_) go down with the common
French herd at the very first hearing, just as if it were some idiotic
refrain of the café chantant!

So much for Blagnerismus _v_. Svengalismus.

But I fear there is no space within the limits of this humble tale for
these masterpieces of technical musical criticism.

Besides, there are other reasons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our three heroes walked back to the boulevards, the only silent ones
amid the throng that poured through the Rue St. Honoré, as the Cirque
des Bashibazoucks emptied itself of its over-excited audience.

They went arm in arm, as usual; but this time Little Billee was in the
middle. He wished to feel on each side of him the warm and genial
contact of his two beloved old friends. It seemed as if they had
suddenly been restored to him, after five long years of separation; his
heart was overflowing with affection for them, too full to speak just
yet! Overflowing, indeed, with the love of love, the love of life, the
love of death--the love of all that is, and ever was, and ever will be!
just as in his old way.

He could have hugged them both in the open street, before the whole
world; and the delight of it was that this was no dream; about that
there was no mistake. He was himself again at last, after five years,
and wide awake; and he owed it all to Trilby!

And what did he feel for Trilby? He couldn't tell yet. It was too vast
as yet to be measured; and, alas! it was weighted with such a burden of
sorrow and regret that he might well put off the thought of it a little
while longer, and gather in what bliss he might: like the man whose
hearing has been restored after long years, he would revel in the mere
physical delight of hearing for a space, and not go out of his way as
yet to listen for the bad news that was already in the air, and would
come to roost quite soon enough.

Taffy and the Laird were silent also; Trilby's voice was still in their
ears and hearts, her image in their eyes, and utter bewilderment still
oppressed them and kept them dumb.

It was a warm and balmy night, almost like mid-summer; and they stopped
at the first café they met on the Boulevard de la Madeleine (_comme
autrefois_), and ordered bocks of beer, and sat at a little table on
the pavement, the only one unoccupied; for the café was already crowded,
the hum of lively talk was great, and "la Svengali" was in every mouth.

The Laird was the first to speak. He emptied his bock at a draught, and
called for another, and lit a cigar, and said, "I don't believe it was
Trilby, after all!" It was the first time her name had been mentioned
between them that evening--and for five years!

"Good heavens!" said Taffy. "Can you doubt it?"

"Oh yes! that was Trilby," said Little Billee.

Then the Laird proceeded to explain that, putting aside the
impossibility of Trilby's ever being taught to sing in tune, and her
well-remembered loathing for Svengali, he had narrowly scanned her face
through his opera-glass, and found that in spite of a likeness quite
marvellous there were well-marked differences. Her face was narrower and
longer, her eyes larger, and their expression not the same; then she
seemed taller and stouter, and her shoulders broader and more drooping,
and so forth.

But the others wouldn't hear of it, and voted him cracked, and declared
they even recognized the peculiar twang of her old speaking voice in the
voice she now sang with, especially when she sang low down. And they all
three fell to discussing the wonders of her performance like everybody
else all round; Little Billee leading, with an eloquence and a seeming
of technical musical knowledge that quite impressed them, and made them
feel happy and at ease; for they were anxious for his sake about the
effect this sudden and so unexpected sight of her would have upon him
after all that had passed.

He seemed transcendently happy and elate--incomprehensibly so, in
fact--and looked at them both with quite a new light in his eyes, as if
all the music he had heard had trebled not only his joy in being alive,
but his pleasure at being with them. Evidently he had quite outgrown his
old passion for her, and that was a comfort indeed!

But Little Billee knew better.

He knew that his old passion for her had all come back, and was so
overwhelming and immense that he could not feel it just yet, nor yet the
hideous pangs of a jealousy so consuming that it would burn up his life.
He gave himself another twenty-four hours.

But he had not to wait so long. He woke up after a short, uneasy sleep
that very night, to find that the flood was over him; and he realized
how hopelessly, desperately, wickedly, insanely he loved this woman, who
might have been his, but was now the wife of another man; a greater than
he, and one to whom she owed it that she was more glorious than any
other woman on earth--a queen among queens--a goddess! for what was any
earthly throne compared to that she established in the hearts and souls
of all who came within the sight and hearing of her! beautiful as she
was besides--beautiful, beautiful! And what must be her love for the man
who had taught her and trained her, and revealed her towering genius to
herself and to the world!--a man resplendent also, handsome and tall and
commanding--a great artist from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot!

And the remembrance of them--hand in hand, master and pupil, husband and
wife--smiling and bowing in the face of all that splendid tumult they
had called forth and could not quell, stung and tortured and maddened
him so that he could not lie still, but got up and raged and rampaged up
and down his hot, narrow, stuffy bedroom, and longed for his old
familiar brain-disease to come back and narcotize his trouble, and be
his friend, and stay with him till he died!

[Illustration: "AND THE REMEMBRANCE OF THEM--HAND IN HAND"]

Where was he to fly for relief from such new memories as these, which
would never cease; and the old memories, and all the glamour and grace
of them that had been so suddenly called out of the grave? And how could
he escape, now that he felt the sight of her face and the sound of her
voice would be a craving--a daily want--like that of some poor starving
outcast for warmth and meat and drink?

And little innocent, pathetic, ineffable, well-remembered sweetnesses of
her changing face kept painting themselves on his retina; and
incomparable tones of this new thing, her voice, her infinite voice,
went ringing in his head, till he all but shrieked aloud in his agony.

And then the poisoned and delirious sweetness of those mad kisses,

        "by hopeless fancy feigned
    On lips that are for others"!

And then the grewsome physical jealousy, that miserable inheritance of
all artistic sons of Adam, that plague and torment of the dramatic,
plastic imagination, which can idealize so well, and yet realize, alas!
so keenly. After three or four hours spent like this, he could stand it
no longer; madness was lying his way. So he hurried on a garment, and
went and knocked at Taffy's door.

"Good God! what's the matter with you?" exclaimed the good Taffy, as
Little Billee tumbled into his room, calling out:

"Oh, Taffy, Taffy, I've g-g-gone mad, I think!" And then, shivering all
over, and stammering incoherently, he tried to tell his friend what was
the matter with him, with great simplicity.

Taffy, in much alarm, slipped on his trousers and made Little Billee get
into his bed, and sat by his side holding his hand. He was greatly
perplexed, fearing the recurrence of another attack like that of five
years back. He didn't dare leave him for an instant to wake the Laird
and send for a doctor.

Suddenly Little Billee buried his face in the pillow and began to sob,
and some instinct told Taffy this was the best thing that could happen.
The boy had always been a highly strung, emotional, over-excitable,
over-sensitive, and quite uncontrolled mammy's-darling, a cry-baby sort
of chap, who had never been to school. It was all a part of his genius,
and also a part of his charm. It would do him good once more to have a
good blub after five years! After a while Little Billee grew quieter,
and then suddenly he said: "What a miserable ass you must think me, what
an unmanly duffer!"

"Why, my friend?"

"Why, for going on in this idiotic way. I really couldn't help it. I
went mad, I tell you. I've been walking up and down my room all night,
till everything seemed to go round."

"So have I."

"You? What for?"

"The very same reason."

"_What!_"

"I was just as fond of Trilby as you were. Only she happened to prefer
_you_."

"_What!_" cried Little Billee again. "_You_ were fond of Trilby?"

"I believe you, my boy!"

"In _love_ with her?"

"I believe you, my boy!"

"She never knew it, then!"

[Illustration: "'I BELIEVE YOU, MY BOY!'"]

"Oh yes, she did."

"She never told me, then!"

"Didn't she? That's like her. _I_ told _her_, at all events. I asked her
to marry me."

"Well--I _am_ damned! When?"

"That day we took her to Meudon, with Jeannot, and dined at the Garde
Champêtre's, and she danced the cancan with Sandy."

"Well--I _am_--And she _refused_ you?"

"Apparently so."

"Well, I--Why on earth did she refuse you?"

"Oh, I suppose she'd already begun to fancy _you_, my friend. _Il y en a
toujours un autre!_"

"Fancy _me_--prefer _me_--to _you_?"

"Well, yes. It _does_ seem odd--eh, old fellow? But there's no
accounting for tastes, you know. She's built on such an ample scale
herself, I suppose, that she likes little uns--contrast, you see. She's
very maternal, I think. Besides, you're a smart little chap; and you
ain't half bad; and you've got brains and talent, and lots of cheek, and
all that. I'm rather a _ponderous_ kind of party."

"Well--I _am_ damned!"

"_C'est comme ça!_ I took it lying down, you see."

"Does the Laird know?"

"No; and I don't want him to--nor anybody else."

"Taffy, what a regular downright old trump you are!"

"Glad you think so; anyhow, we're both in the same boat, and we've got
to make the best of it. She's another man's wife, and probably she's
very fond of him. I'm sure she ought to be, cad as he is, after all he's
done for her. So there's an end of it."

"Ah! there'll never be an end of it for _me_--never--never--oh, never,
my God! She would have married me but for my mother's meddling, and that
stupid old ass, my uncle. What a wife! Think of all she must have in her
heart and brain, only to _sing_ like that! And, O Lord! how beautiful
she is--a goddess! Oh, the brow and cheek and chin, and the way her
head's put on! did you _ever_ see anything like it! Oh, if only I hadn't
written and told my mother I was going to marry her! why, we should have
been man and wife for five years by this time--living at
Barbizon--painting away like mad! Oh, what a heavenly life! Oh, curse
all officious meddling with other people's affairs! Oh! oh!..."

"There you go again! What's the good? and where do _I_ come in, my
friend? _I_ should have been no better off, old fellow--worse than ever,
I think."

Then there was a long silence.

At length Little Billee said:

"Taffy, I can't tell you what a trump you are. All I've ever thought of
you--and God knows that's enough--will be nothing to what I shall always
think of you after this."

"All right, old chap."

"And now I think _I_'m all right again, for a time--and I shall cut back
to bed. Good-night! Thanks more than I can ever express!" And Little
Billee, restored to his balance, cut back to his own bed just as the day
was breaking.




Part Seventh

    "The moon made thy lips pale, beloved;
         The wind made thy bosom chill;
           The night did shed
           On thy dear head
     Its frozen dew, and thou didst lie
     Where the bitter breath of the naked sky
         Might visit thee at will."


Next morning our three friends lay late abed, and breakfasted in their
rooms.

They had all three passed "white nights"--even the Laird, who had tossed
about and pressed a sleepless pillow till dawn, so excited had he been
by the wonder of Trilby's reincarnation, so perplexed by his own doubts
as to whether it was really Trilby or not.

And certain haunting tones of her voice, that voice so cruelly sweet
(which clove the stillness with a clang so utterly new, so strangely
heart-piercing and seductive, that the desire to hear it once more
became nostalgic--almost an ache!), certain bits and bars and phrases of
the music she had sung, unspeakable felicities and facilities of
execution; sudden exotic warmths, fragrances, tendernesses, graces,
depths, and breadths; quick changes from grave to gay, from rough to
smooth, from great metallic brazen clangors to soft golden suavities;
all the varied modes of sound we try so vainly to borrow from vocal
nature by means of wind and reed and string--all this new "Trilbyness"
kept echoing in his brain all night (for he was of a nature deeply
musical), and sleep had been impossible to him.

    "As when we dwell upon a word we know,
     Repeating, till the word we know so well
     Becomes a wonder, and we know not why,"

so dwelt the Laird upon the poor old tune "Ben Bolt," which kept singing
itself over and over again in his tired consciousness, and maddened him
with novel, strange, unhackneyed, unsuspected beauties such as he had
never dreamed of in any earthly music.

It had become a wonder, and he knew not why!

They spent what was left of the morning at the Louvre, and tried to
interest themselves in the "Marriage of Cana," and the "Woman at the
Well," and Vandyck's man with the glove, and the little princess of
Velasquez, and Lisa Gioconda's smile: it was of no use trying. There was
no sight worth looking at in all Paris but Trilby in her golden raiment;
no other princess in the world; no smile but hers, when through her
parted lips came bubbling Chopin's Impromptu. They had not long to stay
in Paris, and they must drink of that bubbling fountain once
more--_coûte que coûte!_ They went to the Salle des Bashibazoucks, and
found that all seats all over the house had been taken for days and
weeks; and the "queue" at the door had already begun! and they had to
give up all hopes of slaking this particular thirst.

Then they went and lunched perfunctorily, and talked desultorily over
lunch, and read criticisms of la Svengali's début in the morning
papers--a chorus of journalistic acclamation gone mad, a frenzied eulogy
in every key--but nothing was good enough for them! Brand-new words were
wanted--another language!

Then they wanted a long walk, and could think of nowhere to go in all
Paris--that immense Paris, where they had promised themselves to see so
much that the week they were to spend there had seemed too short!

Looking in a paper, they saw it announced that the band of the Imperial
Guides would play that afternoon in the Pré Catelan, Bois de Boulogne,
and thought they might as well walk there as anywhere else, and walk
back again in time to dine with the Passefils--a prandial function which
did not promise to be very amusing; but still it was something to kill
the evening with, since they couldn't go and hear Trilby again.

Outside the Pré Catelan they found a crowd of cabs and carriages,
saddle-horses and grooms. One might have thought one's self in the
height of the Paris season. They went in, and strolled about here and
there, and listened to the band, which was famous (it has performed in
London at the Crystal Palace), and they looked about and studied life,
or tried to.

Suddenly they saw, sitting with three ladies (one of whom, the eldest,
was in black), a very smart young officer, a guide, all red and green
and gold, and recognized their old friend Zouzou. They bowed, and he
knew them at once, and jumped up and came to them and greeted them
warmly, especially his old friend Taffy, whom he took to his mother--the
lady in black--and introduced to the other ladies, the younger of whom,
strangely unlike the rest of her countrywomen, was so lamentably, so
pathetically plain that it would be brutal to attempt the cheap and easy
task of describing her. It was Miss Lavinia Hunks, the famous American
millionairess, and her mother. Then the good Zouzou came back and talked
to the Laird and Little Billee.

Zouzou, in some subtle and indescribable way, had become very ducal
indeed.

He looked extremely distinguished, for one thing, in his beautiful
guide's uniform, and was most gracefully and winningly polite. He
inquired warmly after Mrs. and Miss Bagot, and begged Little Billee
would recall him to their amiable remembrance when he saw them again. He
expressed most sympathetically his delight to see Little Billee looking
so strong and so well (Little Billee looked like a pallid little
washed-out ghost, after his white night).

They talked of Dodor. He said how attached he was to Dodor, and always
should be; but Dodor, it seemed, had made a great mistake in leaving the
army and going into a retail business (_petit commerce_). He had done
for himself--_dégringolé!_ He should have stuck to the _dragons_--with a
little patience and good conduct he would have "won his epaulet"--and
then one might have arranged for him a good little marriage--_un parti
convenable_--for he was "très joli garçon, Dodor! bonne tournure--et
très gentiment né! C'est très ancien, les Rigolot--dans le Poitou, je
crois--Lafarce, et tout ça; tout à fait bien!"

It was difficult to realize that this polished and discreet and somewhat
patronizing young man of the world was the jolly dog who had gone after
Little Billee's hat on all fours in the Rue Vieille des Mauvais Ladres
and brought it back in his mouth--the Caryhatide!

Little Billee little knew that Monsieur le Duc de la
Rochemartel-Boisségur had quite recently delighted a very small and
select and most august imperial supper-party at Compiègne with this very
story, not blinking a single detail of his own share in it--and had
given a most touching and sympathetic description of "le joli petit
peintre anglais qui s'appelait Litrebili, et ne pouvait pas se tenir sur
ses jambes--et qui pleurait d'amour fraternel dans les bras de mon
copain Dodor!"

"Ah! Monsieur Gontran, ce que je donnerais pour avoir vu ça!" had said
the greatest lady in France; "un de mes zouaves--à quatre pattes--dans
la rue--un chapeau dans la bouche--oh--c'est impayable!"

Zouzou kept these blackguard bohemian reminiscences for the imperial
circle alone--to which it was suspected that he was secretly rallying
himself. Among all outsiders--especially within the narrow precincts of
the cream of the noble Faubourg (which remained aloof from the
Tuileries)--he was a very proper and gentlemanlike person indeed, as his
brother had been--and, in his mother's fond belief, "très bien pensant,
très bien vu, à Frohsdorf et à Rome."

_On lui aurait donné le bon Dieu sans confession_--as Madame Vinard had
said of Little Billee--they would have shriven him at sight, and
admitted him to the holy communion on trust!

He did not present Little Billee and the Laird to his mother, nor to
Mrs. and Miss Hunks; that honor was reserved for "the Man of Blood"
alone; nor did he ask where they were staying, nor invite them to call
on him. But in parting he expressed the immense pleasure it had given
him to meet them again, and the hope he had of some day shaking their
hands in London.

As the friends walked back to Paris together, it transpired that "the
Man of Blood" had been invited by Madame Duchesse Mère (Maman Duchesse,
as Zouzou called her) to dine with her next day, and meet the Hunkses at
a furnished apartment she had taken in the Place Vendôme; for they had
let (to the Hunkses) the Hôtel de la Rochemartel in the Rue de Lille;
they had also been obliged to let their place in the country, le château
de Boisségur (to Monsieur Despoires, or "des Poires," as he chose to
spell himself on his visiting-cards--the famous soap-manufacturer--"Un
très brave homme, à ce qu'on dit!" and whose only son, by-the-way, soon
after married Mademoiselle Jeanne-Adélaïde d'Amaury-Brissac de
Roncesvaulx de Boisségur de la Rochemartel).

"Il ne fait pas gras chez nous à présent--je vous assure!" Madame
Duchesse Mère had pathetically said to Taffy--but had given him to
understand that things would be very much better for her son, in the
event of his marriage with Miss Hunks.

"Good heavens!" said Little Billee, on hearing this; "that grotesque
little bogy in blue? Why, she's deformed--she squints--she's a dwarf,
and looks like an idiot! Millions or no millions, the man who marries
her is a felon! As long as there are stones to break and a road to break
them on, the able-bodied man who marries a woman like that for anything
but pity and kindness--and even then--dishonors himself, insults his
ancestry, and inflicts on his descendants a wrong that nothing will ever
redeem--he nips them in the bud--he blasts them forever! He ought to be
cut by his fellow-men--sent to Coventry--to jail--to penal servitude for
life! He ought to have a separate hell to himself when he dies. He ought
to--"

"Shut up, you little blaspheming ruffian!" said the Laird. "Where do
_you_ expect to go to, yourself, with such frightful sentiments? And
what would become of your beautiful old twelfth-century dukedoms, with a
hundred yards of back-frontage opposite the Louvre, on a beautiful
historic river, and a dozen beautiful historic names, and no money--if
_you_ had your way?" and the Laird wunk his historic wink.

"Twelfth-century dukedoms be damned!" said Taffy _au grand sérieux_, as
usual. "Little Billee's quite right, and Zouzou makes me sick! Besides,
what does she marry _him_ for--not for his beauty either, I guess! She's
his fellow-criminal, his deliberate accomplice, _particeps delicti_,
accessory before the act and after! She has no right to marry at all!
tar and feathers and a rail for both of them--and for Maman Duchesse
too--and I suppose that's why I refused her invitation to dinner! and
now let's go and dine with Dodor--...anyhow Dodor's young woman doesn't
marry him for a dukedom--or even his 'de'--_mais bien pour ses beaux
yeux!_ and if the Rigolots of the future turn out less nice to look at
than their sire, and not quite so amusing, they will probably be a great
improvement on him in many other ways. There's room enough--and to
spare!"

[Illustration: "MAMAN DUCHESSE"]

"'Ear! 'ear!" said Little Billee (who always grew flippant when Taffy
got on his high horse). "Your 'ealth and song, sir--them's my sentiments
to a T! What shall we 'ave the pleasure of drinkin', after that wery nice
'armony?"

After which they walked on in silence, each, no doubt, musing on the
general contrariness of things, and imagining what splendid little
Wynnes, or Bagots, or McAlisters might have been ushered into a decadent
world for its regeneration if fate had so willed it that a certain
magnificent and singularly gifted grisette, etc., etc., etc....

Mrs. and Miss Hunks passed them as they walked along, in a beautiful
blue barouche with C springs--_un "huit-ressorts"_; Maman Duchesse
passed them in a hired fly; Zouzou passed them on horseback; "tout
Paris" passed them; but they were none the wiser, and agreed that the
show was not a patch on that in Hyde Park during the London season.

When they reached the Place de la Concorde it was that lovely hour of a
fine autumn day in beautiful bright cities when all the lamps are lit in
the shops and streets and under the trees, and it is still daylight--a
quickly fleeting joy; and as a special treat on this particular occasion
the sun set, and up rose the yellow moon over eastern Paris, and floated
above the chimney-pots of the Tuileries.

They stopped to gaze at the homeward procession of cabs and carriages,
as they used to do in the old times. Tout Paris was still passing; tout
Paris is very long.

They stood among a little crowd of sight-seers like themselves, Little
Billee right in front--in the road.

Presently a magnificent open carriage came by--more magnificent than
even the Hunkses', with liveries and harness quite vulgarly
resplendent--almost Napoleonic.

Lolling back in it lay Monsieur et Madame Svengali--he with his
broad-brimmed felt sombrero over his long black curls, wrapped in costly
furs, smoking his big cigar of the Havana.

By his side la Svengali--also in sables--with a large black velvet hat
on, her light brown hair done up in a huge knot on the nape of her neck.
She was rouged and pearl-powdered, and her eyes were blackened beneath,
and thus made to look twice their size; but in spite of all such
disfigurements she was a most splendid vision, and caused quite a little
sensation in the crowd as she came slowly by.

Little Billee's heart was in his mouth. He caught Svengali's eye, and
saw him speak to her. She turned her head and looked at him standing
there--they both did. Little Billee bowed. She stared at him with a cold
stare of disdain, and cut him dead--so did Svengali. And as they passed
he heard them both snigger--she with a little high-pitched, flippant
snigger worthy of a London bar-maid.

Little Billee was utterly crushed, and everything seemed turning round.

The Laird and Taffy had seen it all without losing a detail. The
Svengalis had not even looked their way. The Laird said:

"It's not Trilby--I swear! She could _never_ have done that--it's not
_in_ her! and it's another face altogether--I'm sure of it!"

[Illustration: THE CUT DIRECT]

Taffy was also staggered and in doubt. They caught hold of Little
Billee, each by an arm, and walked him off to the boulevards. He was
quite demoralized, and wanted not to dine at the Passefils'. He wanted
to go straight home at once. He longed for his mother as he used to long
for her when he was in trouble as a small boy and she was away from
home--longed for her desperately--to hug her and hold her and fondle
her, and be fondled, for his own sake and hers; all his old love for her
had come back in full--with what arrears! all his old love for his
sister, for his old home.

When they went back to the hotel to dress (for Dodor had begged them to
put on their best evening war-paint, so as to impress his future
mother-in-law), Little Billee became fractious and intractable. And it
was only on Taffy's promising that he would go all the way to Devonshire
with him on the morrow, and stay with him there, that he could be got to
dress and dine.

The huge Taffy lived entirely by his affections, and he hadn't many to
live by--the Laird, Trilby, and Little Billee.

Trilby was unattainable, the Laird was quite strong and independent
enough to get on by himself, and Taffy had concentrated all his
faculties of protection and affection on Little Billee, and was equal to
any burden or responsibility all this instinctive young fathering might
involve.

In the first place, Little Billee had always been able to do quite
easily, and better than any one else in the world, the very things Taffy
most longed to do himself and couldn't, and this inspired the good Taffy
with a chronic reverence and wonder he could not have expressed in
words.

Then Little Billee was physically small and weak, and incapable of
self-control. Then he was generous, amiable, affectionate, transparent
as crystal, without an atom of either egotism or conceit; and had a gift
of amusing you and interesting you by his talk (and its complete
sincerity) that never palled; and even his silence was charming--one
felt so sure of him--so there was hardly any sacrifice, little or big,
that big Taffy was not ready and glad to make for Little Billee. On the
other hand, there lay deep down under Taffy's surface irascibility and
earnestness about trifles (and beneath his harmless vanity of the strong
man), a long-suffering patience, a real humility, a robustness of
judgment, a sincerity and all-roundness, a completeness of sympathy,
that made him very good to trust and safe to lean upon. Then his
powerful, impressive aspect, his great stature, the gladiatorlike poise
of his small round head on his big neck and shoulders, his huge deltoids
and deep chest and slender loins, his clean-cut ankles and wrists, all
the long and bold and highly-finished athletic shapes of him, that easy
grace of strength that made all his movements a pleasure to watch, and
any garment look well when he wore it--all this was a perpetual feast to
the quick, prehensile, æsthetic eye. And then he had such a solemn,
earnest, lovable way of bending pokers round his neck, and breaking them
on his arm, and jumping his own height (or near it), and lifting up
arm-chairs by one leg with one hand, and what not else!

So that there was hardly any sacrifice, little or big, that Little
Billee would not accept from big Taffy as a mere matter of course--a
fitting and proper tribute rendered by bodily strength to genius.

_Par nobile fratrum_--well met and well mated for fast and long-enduring
friendship.

       *       *       *       *       *

The family banquet at Monsieur Passefil's would have been dull but for
the irrepressible Dodor, and still more for the Laird of Cockpen, who
rose to the occasion, and surpassed himself in geniality, drollery, and
eccentricity of French grammar and accent. Monsieur Passefil was also a
droll in his way, and had the quickly familiar, jocose facetiousness
that seems to belong to the successful middle-aged bourgeois all over
the world, when he's not pompous instead (he can even be both
sometimes).

Madame Passefil was not jocose. She was much impressed by the
aristocratic splendor of Taffy, the romantic melancholy and refinement
of Little Billee, and their quiet and dignified politeness. She always
spoke of Dodor as Monsieur de Lafarce, though the rest of the family
(and one or two friends who had been invited) always called him Monsieur
Théodore, and he was officially known as Monsieur Rigolot.

Whenever Madame Passefil addressed him or spoke of him in this
aristocratic manner (which happened very often), Dodor would wink at his
friends, with his tongue in his cheek. It seemed to amuse him beyond
measure.

Mademoiselle Ernestine was evidently too much in love to say anything,
and seldom took her eyes off Monsieur Théodore, whom she had never seen
in evening dress before. It must be owned that he looked very nice--more
ducal than even Zouzou--and to be Madame de Lafarce _en perspective_,
and the future owner of such a brilliant husband as Dodor, was enough to
turn a stronger little bourgeois head than Mademoiselle Ernestine's.

She was not beautiful, but healthy, well grown, well brought up, and
presumably of a sweet, kind, and amiable disposition--an _ingénue_ fresh
from her convent--innocent as a child, no doubt; and it was felt that
Dodor had done better for himself (and for his race) than Monsieur le
Duc. Little Dodors need have no fear.

After dinner the ladies and gentlemen left the dining-room together, and
sat in a pretty salon overlooking the boulevard, where cigarettes were
allowed, and there was music. Mademoiselle Ernestine laboriously played
"Les Cloches du Monastère" (by Monsieur Lefébure-Wély, if I'm not
mistaken). It's the most bourgeois piece of music I know.

[Illustration:

    "PETIT ENFANT, J'AIMAIS D'UN AMOUR TENDRE
      MA MÈRE ET DIEU--SAINTES AFFECTIONS!
    PUIS MON AMOUR AUX FLEURS SE FIT ENTENDRE,
      PUIS AUX OISEAUX, ET PUIS AUX PAPILLONS!"]

Then Dodor, with his sweet high voice, so strangely pathetic and true,
sang goody-goody little French songs of innocence (of which he seemed
to have an endless répertoire) to his future wife's conscientious
accompaniment--to the immense delight, also, of all his future family,
who were almost in tears--and to the great amusement of the Laird, at
whom he winked in the most pathetic parts, putting his forefinger to the
side of his nose, like Noah Claypole in _Oliver Twist_.

The wonder of the hour, la Svengali, was discussed, of course; it was
unavoidable. But our friends did not think it necessary to reveal that
she was "la grande Trilby." That would soon transpire by itself.

And, indeed, before the month was a week older the papers were full of
nothing else.

Madame Svengali--"la grande Trilby"--was the only daughter of the
honorable and reverend Sir Lord O'Ferrall.

She had run away from the primeval forests and lonely marshes of le
Dublin, to lead a free-and-easy life among the artists of the quartier
latin of Paris--_une vie de bohème!_

She was the Venus Anadyomene from top to toe.

She was _blanche comme neige, avec un volcan dans le cœur_.

Casts of her alabaster feet could be had at Brucciani's, in the Rue de
la Souricière St. Denis. (He made a fortune.)

Monsieur Ingres had painted her left foot on the wall of a studio in the
Place St. Anatole des Arts; and an eccentric Scotch milord (le Comte de
Pencock) had bought the house containing the flat containing the studio
containing the wall on which it was painted, had had the house pulled
down, and the wall framed and glazed and sent to his castle of
Édimbourg.

(This, unfortunately, was in excess of the truth. It was found
impossible to execute the Laird's wish, on account of the material the
wall was made of. So the Lord Count of Pencock--such was Madame Vinard's
version of Sandy's nickname--had to forego his purchase.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning our friends were in readiness to leave Paris; even the
Laird had had enough of it, and longed to get back to his work again--a
"Hari-kari in Yokohama." (He had never been to Japan; but no more had
any one else in those early days.)

They had just finished breakfast, and were sitting in the court-yard of
the hotel, which was crowded, as usual.

Little Billee went into the hotel post-office to despatch a note to his
mother. Sitting sideways there at a small table and reading letters was
Svengali--of all people in the world. But for these two and a couple of
clerks the room was empty.

Svengali looked up; they were quite close together.

Little Billee, in his nervousness, began to shake, and half put out his
hand, and drew it back again, seeing the look of hate on Svengali's
face.

Svengali jumped up, put his letters together, and passing by Little
Billee on his way to the door, called him "verfluchter Schweinhund," and
deliberately spat in his face.

Little Billee was paralyzed for a second or two; then he ran after
Svengali, and caught him just at the top of the marble stairs, and
kicked him, and knocked off his hat, and made him drop all his letters.
Svengali turned round and struck him over the mouth and made it bleed,
and Little Billee hit out like a fury, but with no effect: he couldn't
reach high enough, for Svengali was well over six feet.

There was a crowd round them in a minute, including the beautiful old
man in the court suit and gold chain, who called out:

"Vite! vite! un commissaire de police!"--a cry that was echoed all over
the place.

Taffy saw the row, and shouted, "Bravo, little un!" and jumping up from
his table, jostled his way through the crowd; and Little Billee,
bleeding and gasping and perspiring and stammering, said:

"He spat in my face, Taffy--damn him! I'd never even spoken to him--not
a word, I swear!"

Svengali had not reckoned on Taffy's being there; he recognized him at
once, and turned white.

Taffy, who had dog-skin gloves on, put out his right hand, and deftly
seized Svengali's nose between his fore and middle fingers and nearly
pulled it off, and swung his head two or three times backward and
forward by it, and then from side to side, Svengali holding on to his
wrist; and then, letting him go, gave him a sounding open-handed smack
on his right cheek--and a smack on the face from Taffy (even in play)
was no joke, I'm told; it made one smell brimstone, and see and hear
things that didn't exist.

Svengali gasped worse than Little Billee, and couldn't speak for a
while. Then he said,

"Lâche--grand lâche! che fous enferrai mes témoins!"

"At your orders!" said Taffy, in beautiful French, and drew out his
card-case, and gave him his card in quite the orthodox French manner,
adding: "I shall be here till to-morrow at twelve--but that is my London
address, in case I don't hear from you before I leave. I'm sorry, but
you really mustn't spit, you know--it's not done. I will come to you
whenever you send for me--even if I have to come from the end of the
world."

"Très bien! très bien!" said a military-looking old gentleman close by,
who gave Taffy _his_ card, in case he might be of any service--and who
seemed quite delighted at the row--and indeed it was really pleasant to
note with what a smooth, flowing, rhythmical spontaneity the good Taffy
could always improvise these swift little acts of summary retributive
justice: no hurry or scurry or flurry whatever--not an inharmonious
gesture, not an infelicitous line--the very poetry of violence, and its
only excuse!

Whatever it was worth, this was Taffy's special gift, and it never
failed him at a pinch.

When the commissaire de police arrived, all was over. Svengali had gone
away in a cab, and Taffy put himself at the disposition of the
commissaire.

They went into the post-office and discussed it all with the old
military gentleman, and the major-domo in velvet, and the two clerks who
had seen the original insult. And all that was required of Taffy and his
friends for the present was "their names, prenames, titles, qualities,
age, address, nationality, occupation," etc.

[Illustration: "'VITE! VITE! UN COMMISSAIRE DE POLICE!'"]

"C'est une affaire qui s'arrangera autrement, et autre part!" had said
the military gentleman--monsieur le général Comte de la Tour-aux-Loups.

So it blew over quite simply; and all that day a fierce unholy joy
burned in Taffy's choleric blue eye.

Not, indeed, that he had any wish to injure Trilby's husband, or meant
to do him any grievous bodily harm, whatever happened. But he was glad
to have given Svengali a lesson in manners.

That Svengali should injure _him_ never entered into his calculations
for a moment. Besides, he didn't believe Svengali would show fight; and
in this he was not mistaken.

But he had, for hours, the feel of that long, thick, shapely Hebrew nose
being kneaded between his gloved knuckles, and a pleasing sense of the
effectiveness of the tweak he had given it. So he went about chewing the
cud of that heavenly remembrance all day, till reflection brought
remorse, and he felt sorry; for he was really the mildest-mannered man
that ever broke a head!

Only the sight of Little Billee's blood (which had been made to flow by
such an unequal antagonist) had roused the old Adam.

No message came from Svengali to ask for the names and addresses of
Taffy's seconds; so Dodor and Zouzou (not to mention Mister the general
Count of the Tooraloorals, as the Laird called him) were left
undisturbed; and our three musketeers went back to London clean of
blood, whole of limb, and heartily sick of Paris.

Little Billee stayed with his mother and sister in Devonshire till
Christmas, Taffy staying at the village inn.

It was Taffy who told Mrs. Bagot about la Svengali's all but certain
identity with Trilby, after Little Billee had gone to bed, tired and
worn out, the night of their arrival.

"Good heavens!" said poor Mrs. Bagot. "Why, that's the new singing woman
who's coming over here! There's an article about her in to-day's
_Times_. It says she's a wonder, and that there's no one like her!
Surely that can't be the Miss O'Ferrall I saw in Paris!"

"It seems impossible--but I'm almost certain it is--and Willy has no
doubts in the matter. On the other hand, McAlister declares it isn't."

"Oh, what trouble! So _that's_ why poor Willy looks so ill and
miserable! It's all come back again. Could she sing at all then, when
you knew her in Paris?"

"Not a note--her attempts at singing were quite grotesque."

"Is she still very beautiful?"

"Oh yes; there's no doubt about that; more than ever!"

"And her singing--is that so very wonderful? I remember that she had a
beautiful voice in speaking."

"Wonderful? Ah, yes; I never heard or dreamed the like of it. Grisi,
Alboni, Patti--not one of them to be mentioned in the same breath!"

"Good heavens! Why, she must be simply irresistible! I wonder you're not
in love with her yourself. How dreadful these sirens are, wrecking the
peace of families!"

"You mustn't forget that she gave way at once at a word from you, Mrs.
Bagot; and she was very fond of Willy. She wasn't a siren then."

"Oh yes--oh yes! that's true--she behaved very well--she did her duty--I
can't deny that! You must try and forgive me, Mr. Wynne--although I
can't forgive _her_!--that dreadful illness of poor Willy's--that bitter
time in Paris...."

And Mrs. Bagot began to cry, and Taffy forgave. "Oh, Mr. Wynne--let us
still hope that there's some mistake--that it's only somebody like her!
Why, she's coming to sing in London after Christmas! My poor boy's
infatuation will only increase. What _shall_ I do?

"Well--she's another man's wife, you see. So Willy's infatuation is
bound to burn itself out as soon as he fully recognizes that important
fact. Besides, she cut him dead in the Champs Élysées--and her husband
and Willy had a row next day at the hotel, and cuffed and kicked each
other--that's rather a bar to any future intimacy, I think."

"Oh, Mr. Wynne! my son cuffing and kicking a man whose wife he's in love
with! Good heavens!"

"Oh, it was all right--the man had grossly insulted him--and Willy
behaved like a brick, and got the best of it in the end, and nothing
came of it. I saw it all."

"Oh, Mr. Wynne--and you didn't interfere?'

"Oh yes, I interfered--everybody interfered. It was all right, I assure
you. No bones were broken on either side, and there was no nonsense
about calling out, or swords or pistols, and all that."

[Illustration: "I SUPPOSE YOU DO ALL THIS KIND OF THING FOR MERE
AMUSEMENT, MR. WYNNE?"]

"Thank Heaven!"

In a week or two Little Billee grew more like himself again, and painted
endless studies of rocks and cliffs and sea--and Taffy painted with him,
and was very content. The vicar and Little Billee patched up their feud.
The vicar also took an immense fancy to Taffy, whose cousin, Sir Oscar
Wynne, he had known at college, and lost no opportunity of being
hospitable and civil to him. And his daughter was away in Algiers.

And all "the nobility and gentry" of the neighborhood, including "the
poor dear marquis" (one of whose sons was in Taffy's old regiment), were
civil and hospitable also to the two painters--and Taffy got as much
sport as he wanted, and became immensely popular. And they had, on the
whole, a very good time till Christmas, and a very pleasant Christmas,
if not an exuberantly merry one.

After Christmas Little Billee insisted on going back to London--to paint
a picture for the Royal Academy; and Taffy went with him; and there was
dulness in the house of Bagot--and many misgivings in the maternal heart
of its mistress.

And people of all kinds, high and low, from the family at the Court to
the fishermen on the little pier and their wives and children, missed
the two genial painters, who were the friends of everybody, and made
such beautiful sketches of their beautiful coast.

       *       *       *       *       *

La Svengali has arrived in London. Her name is in every mouth. Her
photograph is in the shop-windows. She is to sing at J----'s monster
concerts next week. She was to have sung sooner, but it seems some hitch
has occurred--a quarrel between Monsieur Svengali and his first violin,
who is a very important person.

A crowd of people as usual, only bigger, is assembled in front of the
windows of the Stereoscopic Company in Regent Street, gazing at
presentments of Madame Svengali in all sizes and costumes. She is very
beautiful--there is no doubt of that; and the expression of her face is
sweet and kind and sad, and of such a distinction that one feels an
imperial crown would become her even better than her modest little
coronet of golden stars. One of the photographs represents her in
classical dress, with her left foot on a little stool, in something of
the attitude of the Venus of Milo, except that her hands are clasped
behind her back; and the foot is bare but for a Greek sandal, and so
smooth and delicate and charming, and with so rhythmical a set and curl
of the five slender toes (the big one slightly tip-tilted and well apart
from its longer and slighter and more aquiline neighbor), that this
presentment of her sells quicker than all the rest.

And a little man who, with two bigger men, has just forced his way in
front says to one of his friends: "Look, Sandy, look--_the foot!_ _Now_
have you got any doubts?"

"Oh yes--those are Trilby's toes, sure enough!" says Sandy. And they all
go in and purchase largely.

As far as I have been able to discover, the row between Svengali and his
first violin had occurred at a rehearsal in Drury Lane Theatre.

Svengali, it seems, had never been quite the same since the 15th of
October previous, and that was the day he had got his face slapped and
his nose tweaked by Taffy in Paris. He had become short-tempered and
irritable, especially with his wife (if she _was_ his wife). Svengali,
it seems, had reasons for passionately hating Little Billee.

He had not seen him for five years--not since the Christmas festivity in
the Place St. Anatole, when they had sparred together after supper, and
Svengali's nose had got in the way on this occasion, and had been made
to bleed; but that was not why he hated Little Billee.

When he caught sight of him standing on the curb in the Place de la
Concorde and watching the procession of "tout Paris," he knew him
directly, and all his hate flared up; he cut him dead, and made his wife
do the same.

Next morning he saw him again in the hotel post-office, looking small
and weak and flurried, and apparently alone; and being an Oriental
Israelite Hebrew Jew, he had not been able to resist the temptation of
spitting in his face, since he must not throttle him to death.

The minute he had done this he had regretted the folly of it. Little
Billee had run after him, and kicked and struck him, and he had returned
the blow and drawn blood; and then, suddenly and quite unexpectedly, had
come upon the scene that apparition so loathed and dreaded of old--the
pig-headed Yorkshireman--the huge British philistine, the irresponsible
bull, the junker, the ex-Crimean, Front-de-Bœuf, who had always
reminded him of the brutal and contemptuous sword-clanking,
spur-jingling aristocrats of his own country--ruffians that treated Jews
like dogs. Callous as he was to the woes of others, the self-indulgent
and highly-strung musician was extra sensitive about himself--a very
bundle of nerves--and especially sensitive to pain and rough usage, and
by no means physically brave. The stern, choleric, invincible blue eye
of the hated Northern gentile had cowed him at once. And that violent
tweaking of his nose, that heavy open-handed blow on his face, had so
shaken and demoralized him that he had never recovered from it.

He was thinking about it always--night and day--and constantly dreaming
at night that he was being tweaked and slapped over again by a colossal
nightmare Taffy, and waking up in agonies of terror, rage, and shame.
All healthy sleep had forsaken him.

Moreover, he was much older than he looked--nearly fifty--and far from
sound. His life had been a long, hard struggle.

He had for his wife, slave, and pupil a fierce, jealous kind of
affection that was a source of endless torment to him; for indelibly
graven in her heart, which he wished to occupy alone, was the
never-fading image of the little English painter, and of this she made
no secret.

Gecko no longer cared for the master. All Gecko's doglike devotion was
concentrated on the slave and pupil, whom he worshipped with a fierce
but pure and unselfish passion. The only living soul that Svengali could
trust was the old Jewess who lived with them--his relative--but even she
had come to love the pupil as much as the master.

On the occasion of this rehearsal at Drury Lane he (Svengali) was
conducting and Madame Svengali was singing. He interrupted her several
times, angrily and most unjustly, and told her she was singing out of
tune, "like a verfluchter tomcat," which was quite untrue. She was
singing beautifully, "Home, Sweet Home."

Finally he struck her two or three smart blows on her knuckles with his
little bâton, and she fell on her knees, weeping and crying out:

"Oh! oh! Svengali! ne me battez pas, mon ami--je fais tout ce que je
peux!"

On which little Gecko had suddenly jumped up and struck Svengali on the
neck near the collar-bone, and then it was seen that he had a little
bloody knife in his hand, and blood flowed from Svengali's neck, and at
the sight of it Svengali had fainted; and Madame Svengali had taken his
head on her lap, looking dazed and stupefied, as in a waking dream.

Gecko had been disarmed, but as Svengali recovered from his faint and
was taken home, the police had not been sent for, and the affair was
hushed up, and a public scandal avoided. But la Svengali's first
appearance, to Monsieur J----'s despair, had to be put off for a week.
For Svengali would not allow her to sing without him; nor, indeed, would
he be parted from her for a minute, or trust her out of his sight.

The wound was a slight one. The doctor who attended Svengali described
the wife as being quite imbecile, no doubt from grief and anxiety. But
she never left her husband's bedside for a moment, and had the obedience
and devotion of a dog.

When the night came round for the postponed début, Svengali was allowed
by the doctor to go to the theatre, but he was absolutely forbidden to
conduct.

[Illustration: THE FIRST VIOLIN LOSES HIS TEMPER]

His grief and anxiety at this were uncontrollable; he raved like a
madman; and Monsieur J---- was almost as bad.

Monsieur J---- had been conducting the Svengali band at rehearsals
during the week, in the absence of its master--an easy task. It had been
so thoroughly drilled and knew its business so well that it could almost
conduct itself, and it had played all the music it had to play (much of
which consisted of accompaniments to la Svengali's songs) many times
before. Her répertoire was immense, and Svengali had written these
orchestral scores with great care and felicity.

On the famous night it was arranged that Svengali should sit in a box
alone, exactly opposite his wife's place on the platform, where she
could see him well; and a code of simple signals was arranged between
him and Monsieur J---- and the band, so that virtually he might conduct,
himself, from his box should any hesitation or hitch occur. This
arrangement was rehearsed the day before (a Sunday) and had turned out
quite successfully, and la Svengali had sung in perfection in the empty
theatre.

When Monday evening arrived everything seemed to be going smoothly; the
house was soon crammed to suffocation, all but the middle box on the
grand tier. It was not a promenade concert, and the pit was turned into
guinea stalls (the promenade concerts were to be given a week later).

Right in the middle of these stalls sat the Laird and Taffy and Little
Billee.

The band came in by degrees and tuned their instruments.

Eyes were constantly being turned to the empty box, and people wondered
what royal personages would appear.

Monsieur J---- took his place amid immense applause, and bowed in his
inimitable way, looking often at the empty box.

Then he tapped and waved his bâton, and the band played its Hungarian
dance music with immense success; when this was over there was a pause,
and soon some signs of impatience from the gallery. Monsieur J---- had
disappeared.

Taffy stood up, his back to the orchestra, looking round.

Some one came into the empty box, and stood for a moment in front,
gazing at the house. A tall man, deathly pale, with long black hair and
a beard.

It was Svengali.

He caught sight of Taffy and met his eyes, and Taffy said: "Good God!
Look! look!"

Then Little Billee and the Laird got up and looked.

[Illustration: "HAST THOU FOUND ME, O MINE ENEMY?"]

And Svengali for a moment glared at them. And the expression of his face
was so terrible with wonder, rage, and fear that they were quite
appalled--and then he sat down, still glaring at Taffy, the whites of
his eyes showing at the top, and his teeth bared in a spasmodic grin of
hate.

Then thunders of applause filled the house, and turning round and
seating themselves, Taffy and Little Billee and the Laird saw Trilby
being led by J---- down the platform, between the players, to the front,
her face smiling rather vacantly, her eyes anxiously intent on Svengali
in his box.

She made her bows to right and left just as she had done in Paris.

The band struck up the opening bars of "Ben Bolt," with which she was
announced to make her début.

She still stared--but she didn't sing--and they played the little
symphony three times.

One could hear Monsieur J---- in a hoarse, anxious whisper saying,

"Mais chantez donc, madame--pour l'amour de Dieu, commencez
donc--commencez!"

She turned round with an extraordinary expression of face, and said,

"Chanter? pourquoi donc voulez-vous que je chante, moi? chanter quoi,
alors?"

"Mais 'Ben Bolt,' parbleu--chantez!"

"Ah--'Ben Bolt!' oui--je connais ça!"

Then the band began again.

And she tried, but failed to begin herself. She turned round and said,

"Comment diable voulez-vous que je chante avec tout ce train qu'ils
font, ces diables de musiciens!"

"Mais, mon Dieu, madame--qu'est-ce que vous avez donc?" cried Monsieur
J----.

[Illustration: "'OH, DON'T YOU REMEMBER SWEET ALICE, BEN BOLT?'"]

"J'ai que j'aime mieux chanter sans toute cette satanée musique,
parbleu! J'aime mieux chanter toute seule!"

"Sans musique, alors--mais chantez--chantez!"

The band was stopped--the house was in a state of indescribable wonder
and suspense.

She looked all round, and down at herself, and fingered her dress. Then
she looked up to the chandelier with a tender, sentimental smile, and
began:

    "Oh, don't you remember sweet Alice, Ben Bolt?
       Sweet Alice with hair so brown,
     Who wept with delight when you gave her a smile--"

She had not got further than this when the whole house was in an
uproar--shouts from the gallery--shouts of laughter, hoots, hisses,
catcalls, cock-crows.

She stopped and glared like a brave lioness, and called out:

"Qu'est-ce que vous avez donc, tous! tas de vieilles pommes cuites que
vous êtes! Est-ce qu'on a peur de vous?" and then, suddenly:

"Why, you're all English, aren't you?--what's all the row about?--what
have you brought me here for?--what have _I_ done, I should like to
know?"

And in asking these questions the depth and splendor of her voice were
so extraordinary--its tone so pathetically feminine, yet so full of hurt
and indignant command, that the tumult was stilled for a moment.

It was the voice of some being from another world--some insulted
daughter of a race more puissant and nobler than ours; a voice that
seemed as if it could never utter a false note.

Then came a voice from the gods in answer:

"Oh, ye're Henglish, har yer? Why don't yer sing as yer _hought_ to
sing--yer've got _voice_ enough, any'ow! why don't yer sing in _tune_?"

"Sing in _tune_!" cried Trilby. "I didn't want to sing at all--I only
sang because I was asked to sing--that gentleman asked me--that French
gentleman with the white waistcoat! I won't sing another note!"

"Oh, yer won't, won't yer! then let us 'ave our money back, or we'll
know what for!"

And again the din broke out, and the uproar was frightful.

Monsieur J---- screamed out across the theatre: "Svengali! Svengali!
qu'est-ce qu'elle a donc, votre femme?... Elle est devenue folle!"

Indeed she had tried to sing "Ben Bolt," but had sung it in her old
way--as she used to sing it in the quartier latin--the most lamentably
grotesque performance ever heard out of a human throat!

"Svengali! Svengali!" shrieked poor Monsieur J----, gesticulating
towards the box where Svengali was sitting, quite impassible, gazing at
Monsieur J----, and smiling a ghastly, sardonic smile, a rictus of hate
and triumphant revenge--as if he were saying,

"I've got the laugh of you _all_, this time!"

Taffy, the Laird, Little Billee, the whole house, were now staring at
Svengali, and his wife was forgotten.

She stood vacantly looking at everybody and everything--the chandelier,
Monsieur J----, Svengali in his box, the people in the stalls, in the
gallery--and smiling as if the noisy scene amused and excited her.

"Svengali! Svengali! Svengali!"

The whole house took up the cry, derisively. Monsieur J---- led Madame
Svengali away; she seemed quite passive. That terrible figure of
Svengali still sat, immovable, watching his wife's retreat--still
smiling his ghastly smile. All eyes were now turned on him once more.

Monsieur J---- was then seen to enter his box with a policeman and two
or three other men, one of them in evening dress. He quickly drew the
curtains to; then, a minute or two after, he reappeared on the platform,
bowing and scraping to the audience, as pale as death, and called for
silence, the gentleman in evening dress by his side; and this person
explained that a very dreadful thing had happened--that Monsieur
Svengali had suddenly died in that box--of apoplexy or heart-disease;
that his wife had seen it from her place on the stage, and had
apparently gone out of her senses, which accounted for her extraordinary
behavior.

He added that the money would be returned at the doors, and begged the
audience to disperse quietly.

Taffy, with his two friends behind him, forced his way to a stage door
he knew. The Laird had no longer any doubts on the score of Trilby's
identity--_this_ Trilby, at all events!

Taffy knocked and thumped till the door was opened, and gave his card to
the man who opened it, stating that he and his friends were old friends
of Madame Svengali, and must see her at once.

The man tried to slam the door in his face, but Taffy pushed through,
and shut it on the crowd outside, and insisted on being taken to
Monsieur J---- immediately; and was so authoritative and big, and
looked such a swell, that the man was cowed, and led him.

They passed an open door, through which they had a glimpse of a
prostrate form on a table--a man partially undressed, and some men
bending over him, doctors probably.

That was the last they saw of Svengali.

Then they were taken to another door, and Monsieur J---- came out, and
Taffy explained who they were, and they were admitted.

La Svengali was there, sitting in an arm-chair by the fire, with several
of the band standing round gesticulating, and talking German or Polish
or Yiddish. Gecko, on his knees, was alternately chafing her hands and
feet. She seemed quite dazed.

But at the sight of Taffy she jumped up and rushed at him, saying: "Oh,
Taffy dear--oh, Taffy! what's it all about? Where on earth am I? What an
age since we met?"

Then she caught sight of the Laird, and kissed him; and then she
recognized Little Billee.

She looked at him for a long while in great surprise, and then shook
hands with him.

"How pale you are! and so changed--you've got a mustache! What's the
matter? Why are you all dressed in black, with white cravats, as if you
were going to a ball? Where's Svengali? I should like to go home!"

"Where--what do you call--home, I mean--where is it?" asked Taffy.

"C'est à l'hôtel de Normandie, dans le Haymarket. On va vous y
conduire, madame!" said Monsieur J----.

"Oui--c'est ça!" said Trilby--"Hôtel de Normandie--mais Svengali--où
est-ce qu'il est?"

"Hélas! madame--il est très malade!"

"Malade? Qu'est-ce qu'il a? How funny you look, with your mustache,
Little Billee! dear, _dear_ Little Billee! so pale, so very pale! Are
you ill too? Oh, I hope not! How _glad_ I am to see you again--you can't
tell! though I promised your mother I wouldn't--never, never! Where are
we now, dear Little Billee?"

Monsieur J---- seemed to have lost his head. He was constantly running
in and out of the room, distracted. The bandsmen began to talk and try
to explain, in incomprehensible French, to Taffy. Gecko seemed to have
disappeared. It was a bewildering business--noises from outside, the
tramp and bustle and shouts of the departing crowd, people running in
and out and asking for Monsieur J----, policemen, firemen, and what not!

Then Little Billee, who had been exerting the most heroic self-control,
suggested that Trilby should come to his house in Fitzroy Square, first
of all, and be taken out of all this--and the idea struck Taffy as a
happy one--and it was proposed to Monsieur J----, who saw that our three
friends were old friends of Madame Svengali's, and people to be trusted;
and he was only too glad to be relieved of her, and gave his consent.

[Illustration: "THE LAST THEY SAW OF SVENGALI"]

Little Billee and Taffy drove to Fitzroy Square to prepare Little
Billee's landlady, who was much put out at first at having such a novel
and unexpected charge imposed on her. It was all explained to her that
it must be so. That Madame Svengali, the greatest singer in Europe and
an old friend of her tenant's, had suddenly gone out of her mind from
grief at the tragic death of her husband, and that for this night at
least the unhappy lady must sleep under that roof--indeed, in Little
Billee's own bed, and that he would sleep at a hotel; and that a nurse
would be provided at once--it might be only for that one night; and that
the lady was as quiet as a lamb, and would probably recover her
faculties after a night's rest. A doctor was sent for from close by; and
soon Trilby appeared, with the Laird, and her appearance and her
magnificent sables impressed Mrs. Godwin, the landlady--brought her
figuratively on her knees. Then Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee
departed again and dispersed--to procure a nurse for the night, to find
Gecko, to fetch some of Trilby's belongings from the Hôtel de Normandie,
and her maid.

The maid (the old German Jewess and Svengali's relative), distracted by
the news of her master's death, had gone to the theatre. Gecko was in
the hands of the police. Things had got to a terrible pass. But our
three friends did their best, and were up most of the night.

So much for la Svengali's début in London.

The present scribe was not present on that memorable occasion, and has
written this inadequate and most incomplete description partly from
hearsay and private information, partly from the reports in the
contemporary newspapers.

Should any surviving eye-witness of that lamentable fiasco read these
pages, and see any gross inaccuracy in this bald account of it, the P.
S. will feel deeply obliged to the same for any corrections or
additions, and these will be duly acted upon and gratefully acknowledged
in all subsequent editions; which will be numerous, no doubt, on account
of the great interest still felt in "la Svengali," even by those who
never saw or heard her (and they are many), and also because the present
scribe is better qualified (by his opportunities) for the compiling of
this brief biographical sketch than any person now living, with the
exception, of course, of "Taffy" and "the Laird," to whose kindness,
even more than to his own personal recollections, he owes whatever it
may contain of serious historical value.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning they all three went to Fitzroy Square. Little Billee had
slept at Taffy's rooms in Jermyn Street.

Trilby seemed quite pathetically glad to see them again. She was dressed
simply and plainly--in black; her trunks had been sent from the hotel.

The hospital nurse was with her; the doctor had just left. He had said
that she was suffering from some great nervous shock--a pretty safe
diagnosis!

Her wits had apparently not come back, and she seemed in no way to
realize her position.

"Ah! what it is to see you again, all three! It makes one feel glad to
be alive! I've thought of many things, but never of this--never! Three
nice clean Englishmen, all speaking English--and _such_ dear old
friends! Ah! j'aime tant ça--c'est le ciel! I wonder I've got a word of
English left!"

[Illustration: "'THREE NICE CLEAN ENGLISHMEN'"]

Her voice was so soft and sweet and low that these ingenuous remarks
sounded like a beautiful song. And she "made the soft eyes" at them all
three, one after another, in her old way; and the soft eyes quickly
filled with tears.

She seemed ill and weak and worn out, and insisted on keeping the
Laird's hand in hers.

"What's the matter with Svengali? He must be dead!"

They all three looked at each other, perplexed.

"Ah! he's dead! I can see it in your faces. He'd got heart-disease. I'm
sorry! oh, very sorry indeed! He was always very kind, poor Svengali!"

"Yes. He's dead," said Taffy.

"And Gecko--dear little Gecko--is he dead too? I saw him last night--he
warmed my hands and feet: where were we?"

"No. Gecko's not dead. But he's had to be locked up for a little while.
He struck Svengali, you know. You saw it all."

"I? No! I never saw it. But I _dreamt_ something like it! Gecko with a
knife, and people holding him, and Svengali bleeding on the ground. That
was just before Svengali's illness. He'd cut himself in the neck, you
know--with a rusty nail, he told me. I wonder how!... But it was wrong
of Gecko to strike him. They were such friends. Why did he?"

"Well--it was because Svengali struck you with his conductor's wand when
you were rehearsing. Struck you on the fingers and made you cry! don't
you remember?"

"Struck _me_! _rehearsing?_--made me _cry_! what _are_ you talking
about, dear Taffy? Svengali never _struck_ me! he was kindness itself!
always! and what should _I_ rehearse?"

"Well, the songs you were to sing at the theatre in the evening."

"Sing at the theatre! _I_ never sang at any theatre--except last night,
if that big place was a theatre! and they didn't seem to like it! I'll
take precious good care never to sing in a theatre again! How they
howled! and there was Svengali in the box opposite, laughing at me. Why
was I taken there? and why did that funny little Frenchman in the white
waistcoat ask me to sing? I know very well I can't sing well enough to
sing in a place like that! What a fool I was! It all seems like a bad
dream! What was it all about? _Was_ it a dream, I wonder!"

"Well--but don't you remember singing at Paris, in the Salle des
Bashibazoucks--and at Vienna--St. Petersburg--lots of places?"

"What nonsense, dear--you're thinking of some one else! _I_ never sang
anywhere! I've been to Vienna and St. Petersburg--but I never _sang_
there--good heavens!"

Then there was a pause, and our three friends looked at her helplessly.

Little Billee said: "Tell me, Trilby--what made you cut me dead when I
bowed to you in the Place de la Concorde, and you were riding with
Svengali in that swell carriage?"

"_I_ never rode in a swell carriage with Svengali! omnibuses were more
in _our_ line! You're dreaming, dear Little Billee--you're taking me for
somebody else; and as for my cutting _you_--why, I'd sooner cut
myself--into little pieces!"

"_Where_ were you staying with Svengali in Paris?"

"I really forget. _Were_ we in Paris? Oh yes, of course. Hôtel Bertrand,
Place Notre Dame des Victoires."

"How long have you been going about with Svengali?"

"Oh, months, years--I forget. I was very ill. He cured me."

"Ill! What was the matter?"

"Oh! I was mad with grief, and pain in my eyes, and wanted to kill
myself, when I lost my dear little Jeannot, at Vibraye. I fancied I
hadn't been careful enough with him. I was crazed! Don't you remember
writing to me there, Taffy--through Angèle Boisse? Such a sweet letter
you wrote! I know it by heart! And you too, Sandy"; and she kissed him.
"I wonder where they are, your letters?--I've got nothing of my own in
the world--not even your dear letters--nor little Billee's--such lots of
them!

[Illustration: "PŒNA PEDE CLAUDO"]

"Well, Svengali used to write to me too--and then he got my address from
Angèle....

"When Jeannot died, I felt I must kill myself or get away from
Vibraye--get away from the people there--so when he was buried I cut my
hair short and got a workman's cap and blouse and trousers and walked
all the way to Paris without saying anything to anybody. I didn't want
anybody to know; I wanted to escape from Svengali, who wrote that he
was coming there to fetch me. I wanted to hide in Paris. When I got
there at last it was two o'clock in the morning, and I was in dreadful
pain--and I'd lost all my money--thirty francs--through a hole in my
trousers-pocket. Besides, I had a row with a carter in the Halle. He
thought I was a man, and hit me and gave me a black eye, just because I
patted his horse and fed it with a carrot I'd been trying to eat myself.
He was tipsy, I think. Well, I looked over the bridge at the river--just
by the Morgue--and wanted to jump in. But the Morgue sickened me, so I
hadn't the pluck. Svengali used to be always talking about the Morgue,
and my going there some day. He used to say he'd come and look at me
there, and the idea made me so sick I couldn't. I got bewildered, and
quite stupid.

"Then I went to Angèle's, in the Rue des Cloîtres Ste. Pétronille, and
waited about; but I hadn't the courage to ring, so I went to the Place
St. Anatole des Arts, and looked up at the old studio window, and
thought how comfortable it was in there, with the big settee near the
stove, and all that, and felt inclined to ring up Madame Vinard; and
then I remembered Little Billee was ill there, and his mother and sister
were with him. Angèle had written me, you know. Poor Little Billee!
There he was, very ill!

"So I walked about the place, and up and down the Rue des Mauvais
Ladres. Then I went down the Rue de Seine to the river again, and again
I hadn't the pluck to jump in. Besides, there was a sergent de ville who
followed and watched me. And the fun of it was that I knew him quite
well, and he didn't know me a bit. It was Célestin Beaumollet, who got
so tipsy on Christmas night. Don't you remember? The tall one, who was
pitted with the small-pox.

[Illustration: "THE OLD STUDIO"]

"Then I walked about till near daylight. Then I could stand it no
longer, and went to Svengali's, in the Rue Tire-Liard, but he'd moved to
the Rue des Saints Pères; and I went there and found him. I didn't want
to a bit, but I couldn't help myself. It was fate, I suppose! He was
very kind, and cured me almost directly, and got me coffee and
bread-and-butter--the best I ever tasted--and a warm bath from Bidet
Frères, in the Rue Savonarole. It was heavenly! And I slept for two days
and two nights! And then he told me how fond he was of me, and how he
would always cure me, and take care of me, and marry me, if I would go
away with him. He said he would devote his whole life to me, and took a
small room for me, next to his.

"I stayed with him there a week, never going out or seeing any one,
mostly asleep. I'd caught a chill.

"He played in two concerts and made a lot of money; and then we went
away to Germany together; and no one was a bit the wiser."

"And _did_ he marry you?"

"Well--no. He couldn't, poor fellow! He'd already got a wife living; and
three children, which he declared were not his. They live in Elberfeld
in Prussia; she keeps a small sweet-stuff shop there. He behaved very
badly to them. But it was not through me! He'd deserted them long
before; but he used to send them plenty of money when he'd got any; I
made him, for I was very sorry for her. He was always talking about her,
and what she said and what she did; and imitating her saying her prayers
and eating pickled cucumber with one hand and drinking schnapps with the
other, so as not to lose any time; till he made me die of laughing. He
could be very funny, Svengali, though he _was_ German, poor dear! And
then Gecko joined us, and Marta."

"Who's Marta?"

"His aunt. She cooked for us, and all that. She's coming here presently;
she sent word from the hotel; she's very fond of him. Poor Marta! Poor
Gecko! What _will_ they ever do without Svengali?"

"Then what did he do to live?"

"Oh! he played at concerts, I suppose--and all that."

"Did you ever hear him?"

"Yes. Sometimes Marta took me; at the beginning, you know. He was always
very much applauded. He plays beautifully. Everybody said so."

"Did he never try and teach you to sing?"

"Oh, maïe, aïe! not he! Why, he always laughed when I tried to sing; and
so did Marta; and so did Gecko! It made them roar! I used to sing 'Ben
Bolt.' They used to make me, just for fun--and go into fits. _I_ didn't
mind a scrap. I'd had no training, you know!"

"Was there anybody else he knew--any other woman?"

"Not that _I_ know of! He always made out he was so fond of me that he
couldn't even _look_ at another woman. Poor Svengali!" (Here her eyes
filled with tears again.) "He was always very kind! But I never could be
fond of him in the way he wished--never! It made me sick even to think
of! Once I used to hate him--in Paris--in the studio; don't you
remember?

"He hardly ever left me; and then Marta looked after me--for I've always
been weak and ill--and often so languid that I could hardly walk across
the room. It was that walk from Vibraye to Paris. I never got over it.

"I used to try and do all I could--be a daughter to him, as I couldn't
be anything else--mend his things, and all that, and cook him little
French dishes. I fancy he was very poor at one time; we were always
moving from place to place. But I always had the best of everything. He
insisted on that--even if he had to go without himself. It made him
quite unhappy when I wouldn't eat, so I used to force myself.

"Then, as soon as I felt uneasy about things, or had any pain, he would
say, 'Dors, ma mignonne!' and I would sleep at once--for hours, I
think--and wake up, oh, so tired! and find him kneeling by me, always so
anxious and kind--and Marta and Gecko! and sometimes we had the doctor,
and I was ill in bed.

"Gecko used to dine and breakfast with us--you've no idea what an angel
he is, poor little Gecko! But what a dreadful thing to strike Svengali!
_Why_ did he? Svengali taught him all he knows!"

"And you knew no one else--no other woman?"

"No one that I can remember--except Marta--not a soul!"

"And that beautiful dress you had on last night?"

"It isn't mine. It's on the bed up-stairs, and so's the fur cloak. They
belong to Marta. She's got lots of them, lovely things--silk, satin,
velvet--and lots of beautiful jewels. Marta deals in them, and makes
lots of money.

"I've often tried them on; I'm very easy to fit," she said, "being so
tall and thin. And poor Svengali would kneel down and cry, and kiss my
hands and feet, and tell me I was his goddess and empress, and all that,
which I hate. And Marta used to cry, too. And then he would say,

"'Et maintenant dors, ma mignonne!'

"And when I woke up I was so tired that I went to sleep again on my own
account.

[Illustration: "'ET MAINTENANT DORS, MA MIGNONNE!'"]

"But he was very patient. Oh, dear me! I've always been a poor,
helpless, useless log and burden to him!

"Once I actually walked in my sleep--and woke up in the market-place at
Prague--and found an immense crowd, and poor Svengali bleeding from the
forehead, in a faint on the ground. He'd been knocked down by a horse
and cart, he told me. He'd got his guitar with him. I suppose he and
Gecko had been playing somewhere, for Gecko had his fiddle. If Gecko
hadn't been there, I don't know what we should have done. You never saw
such queer people as they were--such crowds--you'd think they'd never
seen an Englishwoman before. The noise they made, and the things they
gave me ... some of them went down on their knees, and kissed my hands
and the skirts of my gown.

"He was ill in bed for a week after that, and I nursed him, and he was
very grateful. Poor Svengali! God knows _I_ felt grateful to _him_ for
many things! Tell me how he died! I hope he hadn't much pain."

They told her it was quite sudden, from heart-disease.

"Ah! I knew he had that; he wasn't a healthy man; he used to smoke too
much. Marta used always to be very anxious."

Just then Marta came in.

Marta was a fat, elderly Jewess of rather a grotesque and ignoble type.
She seemed overcome with grief--all but prostrate.

Trilby hugged and kissed her, and took off her bonnet and shawl, and
made her sit down in a big arm-chair, and got her a footstool.

She couldn't speak a word of anything but Polish and a little German.
Trilby had also picked up a little German, and with this and by means of
signs, and no doubt through a long intimacy with each other's ways, they
understood each other very well. She seemed a very good old creature,
and very fond of Trilby, but in mortal terror of the three Englishmen.

Lunch was brought up for the two women and the nurse, and our friends
left them, promising to come again that day.

They were utterly bewildered; and the Laird would have it that there was
another Madame Svengali somewhere, the real one, and that Trilby was a
fraud--self-deceived and self-deceiving--quite unconsciously so, of
course.

Truth looked out of her eyes, as it always had done--truth was in every
line of her face.

The truth only--nothing but the truth could ever be told in that "voice
of velvet," which rang as true when she spoke as that of any thrush or
nightingale, however rebellious it might be now (and forever perhaps) to
artificial melodic laws and limitations and restraints. The long
training it had been subjected to had made it "a wonder, a world's
delight," and though she might never sing another note, her mere speech
would always be more golden than any silence, whatever she might say.

Except on the one particular point of her singing, she had seemed
absolutely sane--so, at least, thought Taffy, the Laird, and Little
Billee. And each thought to himself, besides, that this last incarnation
of Trilbyness was quite the sweetest, most touching, most endearing of
all.

They had not failed to note how rapidly she had aged, now that they had
seen her without her rouge and pearl-powder; she looked thirty at
least--she was only twenty-three.

Her hands were almost transparent in their waxen whiteness; delicate
little frosty wrinkles had gathered round her eyes; there were gray
streaks in her hair; all strength and straightness and elasticity seemed
to have gone out of her with the memory of her endless triumphs (if she
really _was_ la Svengali), and of her many wanderings from city to city
all over Europe.

It was evident enough that the sudden stroke which had destroyed her
power of singing had left her physically a wreck.

But she was one of those rarely gifted beings who cannot look or speak
or even stir without waking up (and satisfying) some vague longing that
lies dormant in the hearts of most of us, men and women alike; grace,
charm, magnetism--whatever the nameless seduction should be called that
she possessed to such an unusual degree--she had lost none of it when
she lost her high spirits, her buoyant health and energy, her wits!

Tuneless and insane, she was more of a siren than ever--a quite
unconscious siren--without any guile, who appealed to the heart all the
more directly and irresistibly that she could no longer stir the
passions.

All this was keenly felt by all three--each in his different way--by
Taffy and Little Billee especially.

All her past life was forgiven--her sins of omission and commission! And
whatever might be her fate--recovery, madness, disease, or death--the
care of her till she died or recovered should be the principal business
of their lives.

Both had loved her. All three, perhaps. One had been loved by her as
passionately, as purely, as unselfishly as any man could wish to be
loved, and in some extraordinary manner had recovered, after many years,
at the mere sudden sight and sound of her, his lost share in our common
inheritance--the power to love, and all its joy and sorrow; without
which he had found life not worth living, though he had possessed every
other gift and blessing in such abundance.

"Oh, Circe, poor Circe, dear Circe, divine enchantress that you were!"
he said to himself, in his excitable way. "A mere look from your eyes, a
mere note of your heavenly voice, has turned a poor, miserable, callous
brute back into a man again! and I will never forget it--never! And now
that a still worse trouble than mine has befallen you, you shall always
be first in my thoughts till the end!"

And Taffy felt pretty much the same, though he was not by way of talking
to himself so eloquent about things as Little Billee.

       *       *       *       *       *

As they lunched, they read the accounts of the previous evening's events
in different papers, three or four of which (including the _Times_) had
already got leaders about the famous but unhappy singer who had been so
suddenly widowed and struck down in the midst of her glory. All these
accounts were more or less correct. In one paper it was mentioned that
Madame Svengali was under the roof and care of Mr. William Bagot, the
painter, in Fitzroy Square.

The inquest on Svengali was to take place that afternoon, and also
Gecko's examination at the Bow Street Police Court, for his assault.

[Illustration: "TAFFY WAS ALLOWED TO SEE GECKO"]

Taffy was allowed to see Gecko, who was remanded till the result of the
post-mortem should be made public. But beyond inquiring most anxiously
and minutely after Trilby, and betraying the most passionate concern for
her, he would say nothing, and seemed indifferent as to his own fate.

When they went to Fitzroy Square, late in the afternoon, they found
that many people, musical, literary, fashionable, and otherwise (and
many foreigners), had called to inquire after Madame Svengali, but no
one had been admitted to see her. Mrs. Godwin was much elated by the
importance of her new lodger.

Trilby had been writing to Angèle Boisse, at her old address in the Rue
des Cloîtres Ste. Pétronille, in the hope that this letter would find
her still there. She was anxious to go back and be a _blanchisseuse de
fin_ with her friend. It was a kind of nostalgia for Paris, the quartier
latin, her clean old trade.

This project our three heroes did not think it necessary to discuss with
her just yet; she seemed quite unfit for work of any kind.

The doctor, who had seen her again, had been puzzled by her strange
physical weakness, and wished for a consultation with some special
authority; Little Billee, who was intimate with most of the great
physicians, wrote about her to Sir Oliver Calthorpe.

She seemed to find a deep happiness in being with her three old friends,
and talked and listened with all her old eagerness and geniality, and
much of her old gayety, in spite of her strange and sorrowful position.
But for this it was impossible to realize that her brain was affected in
the slightest degree, except when some reference was made to her
singing, and this seemed to annoy and irritate her, as though she were
being made fun of. The whole of her marvellous musical career, and
everything connected with it, had been clean wiped out of her
recollection.

She was very anxious to get into other quarters, that Little Billee
should suffer no inconvenience, and they promised to take rooms for her
and Marta on the morrow.

They told her cautiously all about Svengali and Gecko; she was deeply
concerned, but betrayed no such poignant anguish as might have been
expected. The thought of Gecko troubled her most, and she showed much
anxiety as to what might befall him.

Next day she moved with Marta to some lodgings in Charlotte Street,
where everything was made as comfortable for them as possible.

Sir Oliver saw her with Dr. Thorne (the doctor who was attending her)
and Sir Jacob Wilcox.

Sir Oliver took the greatest interest in her case, both for her sake and
his friend Little Billee's. Also his own, for he was charmed with her.
He saw her three times in the course of the week, but could not say for
certain what was the matter with her, beyond taking the very gravest
view of her condition. For all he could advise or prescribe, her
weakness and physical prostration increased rapidly, through no cause he
could discover. Her insanity was not enough to account for it. She lost
weight daily; she seemed to be wasting and fading away from sheer
general atrophy.

Two or three times he took her and Marta for a drive.

On one of these occasions, as they went down Charlotte Street, she saw a
shop with transparent French blinds in the window, and through them some
French women, with neat white caps, ironing. It was a French
_blanchisserie de fin_, and the sight of it interested and excited her
so much that she must needs insist on being put down and on going into
it.

"Je voudrais bien parler à la patronne, si ça ne la dérange pas," she
said.

[Illustration: A FAIR BLANCHISSEUSE DE FIN]

The patronne, a genial Parisian, was much astonished to hear a great
French lady, in costly garments, evidently a person of fashion and
importance, applying to her rather humbly for employment in the
business, and showing a thorough knowledge of the work (and of the
Parisian work-woman's colloquial dialect). Marta managed to catch the
patronne's eye, and tapped her own forehead significantly, and Sir
Oliver nodded. So the good woman humored the great lady's fancy, and
promised her abundance of employment whenever she should want it.

Employment! Poor Trilby was hardly strong enough to walk back to the
carriage; and this was her last outing.

But this little adventure had filled her with hope and good spirits--for
she had as yet received no answer from Angèle Boisse (who was in
Marseilles), and had begun to realize how dreary the quartier latin
would be without Jeannot, without Angèle, without the trois Angliches in
the Place St. Anatole des Arts.

She was not allowed to see any of the strangers who came and made kind
inquiries. This her doctors had strictly forbidden. Any reference to
music or singing irritated her beyond measure. She would say to Marta,
in bad German:

"Tell them, Marta--what nonsense it is! They are taking me for
another--they are mad. They are trying to make a fool of me!"

And Marta would betray great uneasiness--almost terror--when she was
appealed to in this way.




Part Eighth

    "La vie est vaine:
       Un peu d'amour,
     Un peu de haine....
       Et puis--bonjour!

    "La vie est brève:
       Un peu d'espoir,
     Un peu de rève....
       Et puis--bonsoir."


Svengali had died from heart-disease. The cut he had received from Gecko
had not apparently (as far as the verdict of a coroner's inquest could
be trusted) had any effect in aggravating his malady or hastening his
death.

But Gecko was sent for trial at the Old Bailey, and sentenced to hard
labor for six months (a sentence which, if I remember aright, gave rise
to much comment at the time). Taffy saw him again, but with no better
result than before. He chose to preserve an obstinate silence on his
relations with the Svengalis and their relations with each other.

When he was told how hopelessly ill and insane Madame Svengali was, he
shed a few tears, and said: "Ah, pauvrette, pauvrette--ah! monsieur--je
l'aimais tant, je l'aimais tant! il n'y en a pas beaucoup comme elle,
Dieu de misère! C'est un ange du Paradis!"

And not another word was to be got out of him.

It took some time to settle Svengali's affairs after his death. No will
was found. His old mother came over from Germany, and two of his
sisters, but no wife. The comic wife and the three children, and the
sweet-stuff shop in Elberfeld, had been humorous inventions of his
own--a kind of Mrs. Harris!

He left three thousand pounds, every penny of which (and of far larger
sums that he had spent) had been earned by "la Svengali," but nothing
came to Trilby of this; nothing but the clothes and jewels he had given
her, and in this respect he had been lavish enough; and there were
countless costly gifts from emperors, kings, great people of all kinds.
Trilby was under the impression that all these belonged to Marta. Marta
behaved admirably; she seemed bound hand and foot to Trilby by a kind of
slavish adoration, as that of a plain old mother for a brilliant and
beautiful but dying child.

It soon became evident that, whatever her disease might be, Trilby had
but a very short time to live.

She was soon too weak even to be taken out in a Bath-chair, and remained
all day in her large sitting-room with Marta; and there, to her great
and only joy, she received her three old friends every afternoon, and
gave them coffee, and made them smoke cigarettes of caporal as of old;
and their hearts were daily harrowed as they watched her rapid decline.

Day by day she grew more beautiful in their eyes, in spite of her
increasing pallor and emaciation--her skin was so pure and white and
delicate, and the bones of her face so admirable!

[Illustration: A THRONE IN BOHEMIA]

Her eyes recovered all their old humorous brightness when les trois
Angliches were with her, and the expression of her face was so wistful
and tender for all her playfulness, so full of eager clinging to
existence and to them, that they felt the memory of it would haunt them
forever, and be the sweetest and saddest memory of their lives.

Her quick, though feeble gestures, full of reminiscences of the vigorous
and lively girl they had known a few years back, sent waves of pity
through them and pure brotherly love; and the incomparable tones and
changes and modulations of her voice, as she chatted and laughed,
bewitched them almost as much as when she had sung the "Nussbaum" of
Schumann in the Salle des Bashibazoucks.

Sometimes Lorrimer came, and Antony and the Greek. It was like a genial
little court of bohemia. And Lorrimer, Antony, the Laird, and Little
Billee made those beautiful chalk and pencil studies of her head which
are now so well known--all so singularly like her, and so singularly
unlike each other! _Trilby vue à travers quatre tempéraments!_

These afternoons were probably the happiest poor Trilby had ever spent
in her life--with these dear people round her, speaking the language she
loved; talking of old times and jolly Paris days, she never thought of
the morrow.

But later--at night, in the small hours--she would wake up with a start
from some dream full of tender and blissful recollection, and suddenly
realize her own mischance, and feel the icy hand of that which was to
come before many morrows were over; and taste the bitterness of death so
keenly that she longed to scream out loud, and get up, and walk up and
down, and wring her hands at the dreadful thought of parting forever!

But she lay motionless and mum as a poor little frightened mouse in a
trap, for fear of waking up the good old tired Marta, who was snoring at
her side.

And in an hour or two the bitterness would pass away, the creeps and the
horrors; and the stoical spirit of resignation would steal over her--the
balm, the blessed calm! and all her old bravery would come back.

And then she would sink into sleep again, and dream more blissfully than
ever, till the good Marta woke her with a motherly kiss and a fragrant
cup of coffee; and she would find, feeble as she was, and doomed as she
felt herself to be, that joy cometh of a morning; and life was still
sweet for her, with yet a whole day to look forward to.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day she was deeply moved at receiving a visit from Mrs. Bagot, who,
at Little Billee's earnest desire, had come all the way from Devonshire
to see her.

As the graceful little lady came in, pale and trembling all over, Trilby
rose from her chair to receive her, and rather timidly put out her hand,
and smiled in a frightened manner. Neither could speak for a second.
Mrs. Bagot stood stock-still by the door gazing (with all her heart in
her eyes) at the so terribly altered Trilby--the girl she had once so
dreaded.

Trilby, who seemed also bereft of motion, and whose face and lips were
ashen, exclaimed, "I'm afraid I haven't quite kept my promise to you,
after all! but things have turned out so differently! anyhow, you
needn't have any fear of me _now_."

[Illustration: "'OH, MY POOR GIRL! MY POOR GIRL!'"]

At the mere sound of that voice, Mrs. Bagot, who was as impulsive,
emotional, and unregulated as her son, rushed forward, crying, "Oh, my
poor girl, my poor girl!" and caught her in her arms, and kissed and
caressed her, and burst into a flood of tears, and forced her back into
her chair, hugging her as if she were a long-lost child.

"I love you now as much as I always admired you--pray believe it!"

"Oh, how kind of you to say that!" said Trilby, her own eyes filling.
"I'm not at all the dangerous or designing person you thought. I knew
quite well I wasn't a proper person to marry your son all the time; and
told him so again and again. It was very stupid of me to say yes at
last. I was miserable directly after, I assure you. Somehow I couldn't
help myself--I was driven."

"Oh, don't talk of that! don't talk of that! You've never been to blame
in any way--I've long known it--I've been full of remorse! You've been
in my thoughts always, night and day. Forgive a poor jealous mother. As
if _any_ man could help loving you--or any woman either. Forgive me!"

"Oh, Mrs. Bagot--forgive _you_! What a funny idea! But, anyhow, you've
forgiven _me_, and that's all I care for now. I was very fond of your
son--as fond as could be. I am now, but in quite a different sort of
way, you know--the sort of way _you_ must be, I fancy! There was never
another like him that I ever met--anywhere! You _must_ be so proud of
him; who wouldn't? _Nobody's_ good enough for him. I would have been
only too glad to be his servant, his humble servant! I used to tell him
so--but he wouldn't hear of it--he was much too kind! He always thought
of others before himself. And, oh! how rich and famous he's become! I've
heard all about it, and it did me good. It does me more good to think of
than anything else; far more than if I were to be ever so rich and
famous myself, I can tell you!"

This from la Svengali, whose overpowering fame, so utterly forgotten by
herself, was still ringing all over Europe; whose lamentable illness
and approaching death were being mourned and discussed and commented
upon in every capital of the civilized world, as one distressing
bulletin appeared after another. She might have been a royal personage!

Mrs. Bagot knew, of course, the strange form her insanity had taken, and
made no allusion to the flood of thoughts that rushed through her own
brain as she listened to this towering goddess of song, this poor mad
queen of the nightingales, humbly gloating over her son's success....

Poor Mrs. Bagot had just come from Little Billee's, in Fitzroy Square,
close by. There she had seen Taffy, in a corner of Little Billee's
studio, laboriously answering endless letters and telegrams from all
parts of Europe--for the good Taffy had constituted himself Trilby's
secretary and _homme d'affaires_--unknown to her, of course. And this
was no sinecure (though he liked it): putting aside the numerous people
he had to see and be interviewed by, there were kind inquiries and
messages of condolence and sympathy from nearly all the crowned heads of
Europe, through their chamberlains; applications for help from
unsuccessful musical strugglers all over the world to the pre-eminently
successful one; beautiful letters from great and famous people, musical
or otherwise; disinterested offers of service; interested proposals for
engagements when the present trouble should be over; beggings for an
interview from famous impresarios, to obtain which no distance would be
thought too great, etc., etc., etc. It was endless, in English, French,
German, Italian--in languages quite incomprehensible (many letters had
to remain unanswered)--Taffy took an almost malicious pleasure in
explaining all this to Mrs. Bagot.

Then there was a constant rolling of carriages up to the door, and a
thundering of Little Billee's knocker: Lord and Lady Palmerston wish to
know--the Lord Chief Justice wishes to know--the Dean of Westminster
wishes to know--the Marchioness of Westminster wishes to know--everybody
wishes to know if there is any better news of Madame Svengali!

These were small things, truly; but Mrs. Bagot was a small person from a
small village in Devonshire, and one whose heart and eye had hitherto
been filled by no larger image than that of Little Billee; and Little
Billee's fame, as she now discovered for the first time, did not quite
fill the entire universe.

And she mustn't be too much blamed if all these obvious signs of a
world-wide colossal celebrity impressed and even awed her a little.

Madame Svengali! Why, this was the beautiful girl whom she remembered so
well, whom she had so grandly discarded with a word, and who had
accepted her congé so meekly in a minute; whom, indeed, she had been
cursing in her heart for years, because--because what?

Poor Mrs. Bagot felt herself turn hot and red all over, and humbled
herself to the very dust, and almost forgot that she had been in the
right, after all, and that "la grande Trilby" was certainly no fit match
for her son!

So she went quite humbly to see Trilby, and found a poor, pathetic, mad
creature still more humble than herself, who still apologized for--for
what?

A poor, pathetic, mad creature who had clean forgotten that she was the
greatest singer in all the world--one of the greatest artists that had
ever lived; but who remembered with shame and contrition that she had
once taken the liberty of yielding (after endless pressure and repeated
disinterested refusals of her own, and out of sheer irresistible
affection) to the passionate pleadings of a little obscure art student,
a mere boy--no better off than herself--just as penniless and
insignificant a nobody; but--the son of Mrs. Bagot.

All due sense of proportion died out of the poor lady as she remembered
and realized all this!

And then Trilby's pathetic beauty, so touching, so winning, in its rapid
decay; the nameless charm of look and voice and manner that was her
special apanage, and which her malady and singular madness had only
increased; her childlike simplicity, her transparent forgetfulness of
self--all these so fascinated and entranced Mrs. Bagot, whose quick
susceptibility to such impressions was just as keen as her son's, that
she very soon found herself all but worshipping this fast-fading
lily--for so she called her in her own mind--quite forgetting (or
affecting to forget) on what very questionable soil the lily had been
reared, and through what strange vicissitudes of evil and corruption it
had managed to grow so tall and white and fragrant!

Oh, strange compelling power of weakness and grace and prettiness
combined, and sweet, sincere unconscious natural manners! not to speak
of world-wide fame!

For Mrs. Bagot was just a shrewd little conventional British country
matron of the good upper middle-class type, bristling all over with
provincial proprieties and respectabilities, a philistine of the
philistines, in spite of her artistic instincts; one who for years had
(rather unjustly) thought of Trilby as a wanton and perilous siren, an
unchaste and unprincipled and most dangerous daughter of Heth, and the
special enemy of her house.

And here she was--like all the rest of us monads and nomads and
bohemians--just sitting at Trilby's feet.... "A washer-woman! a figure
model! and Heaven knows what besides!" and she had never even heard her
sing!

It was truly comical to see and hear!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Bagot did not go back to Devonshire. She remained in Fitzroy
Square, at her son's, and spent most of her time with Trilby, doing and
devising all kinds of things to distract and amuse her, and lead her
thoughts gently to heaven, and soften for her the coming end of all.

Trilby had a way of saying, and especially of looking, "Thank you" that
made one wish to do as many things for her as one could, if only to make
her say and look it again.

And she had retained much of her old, quaint, and amusing manner of
telling things, and had much to tell still left of her wandering life,
although there were so many strange lapses in her powers of
memory--gaps--which, if they could only have been filled up, would have
been full of such surpassing interest!

Then she was never tired of talking and hearing of Little Billee; and
that was a subject of which Mrs. Bagot could never tire either!

Then there were the recollections of her childhood. One day, in a
drawer, Mrs. Bagot came upon a faded daguerreotype of a woman in a Tam
o' Shanter, with a face so sweet and beautiful and saint-like that it
almost took her breath away. It was Trilby's mother.

"Who and what was your mother, Trilby?"

"Ah, poor mamma!" said Trilby, and she looked at the portrait a long
time. "Ah, she was ever so much prettier than that! Mamma was once a
demoiselle de comptoir--that's a bar-maid, you know--at the Montagnards
Écossais, in the Rue du Paradis Poissonnière--a place where men used to
drink and smoke without sitting down. That was unfortunate, wasn't it?

"Papa loved her with all his heart, although, of course, she wasn't his
equal. They were married at the Embassy, in the Rue du Faubourg St.
Honoré.

[Illustration: "'AH, POOR MAMMA! SHE WAS EVER SO MUCH PRETTIER THAN
THAT!'"]

"_Her_ parents weren't married at all. Her mother was the daughter of a
boatman on Loch Ness, near a place called Drumnadrockit; but her father
was the Honorable Colonel Desmond. He was related to all sorts of great
people in England and Ireland. He behaved very badly to my grandmother
and to poor mamma--his own daughter! deserted them both! Not very
_honorable_ of him, _was_ it? And that's all I know about him."

And then she went on to tell of the home in Paris that might have been
so happy but for her father's passion for drink; of her parents' deaths,
and little Jeannot, and so forth. And Mrs. Bagot was much moved and
interested by these naïve revelations, which accounted in a measure for
so much that seemed unaccountable in this extraordinary woman; who thus
turned out to be a kind of cousin (though on the wrong side of the
blanket) to no less a person than the famous Duchess of Towers.

With what joy would that ever kind and gracious lady have taken poor
Trilby to her bosom had she only known! She had once been all the way
from Paris to Vienna merely to hear her sing. But, unfortunately, the
Svengalis had just left for St. Petersburg, and she had her long journey
for nothing!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Bagot brought her many good books, and read them to her--Dr.
Cummings on the approaching end of the world, and other works of a like
comforting tendency for those who are just about to leave it; the
_Pilgrim's Progress_, sweet little tracts, and what not.

Trilby was so grateful that she listened with much patient attention.
Only now and then a faint gleam of amusement would steal over her face,
and her lips would almost form themselves to ejaculate, "Oh, maïe, aïe!"

Then Mrs. Bagot, as a reward for such winning docility, would read her
_David Copperfield_, and that was heavenly indeed!

But the best of all was for Trilby to look over John Leech's _Pictures
of Life and Character_, just out. She had never seen any drawings of
Leech before, except now and then in an occasional _Punch_ that turned
up in the studio in Paris. And they never palled upon her, and taught
her more of the aspect of English life (the life she loved) than any
book she had ever read. She laughed and laughed; and it was almost as
sweet to listen to as if she were vocalizing the quick part in Chopin's
Impromptu.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day she said, her lips trembling: "I can't make out why you're so
wonderfully kind to me, Mrs. Bagot. I hope you have not forgotten who
and what I am, and what my story is. I hope you haven't forgotten that
I'm not a respectable woman?"

"Oh, my dear child--don't ask me.... I only know that you are you!...
and I am I! and that is enough for me ... you're my poor, gentle,
patient, suffering daughter, whatever else you are--more sinned against
than sinning, I feel sure! But there.... I've misjudged you so, and been
so unjust, that I would give worlds to make you some amends ... besides,
I should be just as fond of you if you'd committed a murder, I really
believe--you're so strange! you're irresistible! Did you ever, in all
your life, meet anybody that _wasn't_ fond of you?"

Trilby's eyes moistened with tender pleasure at such a pretty
compliment. Then, after a few minutes' thought, she said, with engaging
candor and quite simply: "No, I can't say I ever did, that I can think
of just now. But I've forgotten such lots of people!"

       *       *       *       *       *

One day Mrs. Bagot told Trilby that her brother-in-law, Mr. Thomas
Bagot, would much like to come and talk to her.

"Was that the gentleman who came with you to the studio in Paris?"

"Yes."

"Why, he's a clergyman, isn't he? What does he want to come and talk to
_me_ about?"

"Ah! my dear child ..." said Mrs. Bagot, her eyes filling.

Trilby was thoughtful for a while, and then said: "I'm going to die, I
suppose. Oh yes! oh yes! There's no mistake about that!"

"Dear Trilby, we are all in the hands of an Almighty Merciful God!" And
the tears rolled down Mrs. Bagot's cheeks.

After a long pause, during which she gazed out of the window, Trilby
said, in an abstracted kind of way, as though she were talking to
herself: "Après tout, c'est pas déjà si raide, de claquer! J'en ai tant
vus, qui ont passé par la! Au bout du fossé la culbute, ma foi!"

"What are you saying to yourself in French, Trilby? Your French is so
difficult to understand!"

"Oh, I beg your pardon! I was thinking it's not so difficult to die,
after all! I've seen such lots of people do it. I've nursed them, you
know--papa and mamma and Jeannot, and Angèle Boisse's mother-in-law, and
a poor casseur de pierres, Colin Maigret, who lived in the Impasse des
Taupes St. Germain. He'd been run over by an omnibus in the Rue
Vaugirard, and had to have both his legs cut off just above the knee.
They none of them seemed to mind dying a bit. They weren't a bit afraid!
_I'm_ not!

"Poor people don't think much of death. Rich people shouldn't either.
They should be taught when they're quite young to laugh at it and
despise it, like the Chinese. The Chinese die of laughing just as their
heads are being cut off, and cheat the executioner! It's all in the
day's work, and we're all in the same boat--so who's afraid!"

"Dying is not all, my poor child! Are you prepared to meet your Maker
face to face? Have you ever thought about God, and the possible wrath to
come if you should die unrepentant?"

"Oh, but I sha'n't! I've been repenting all my life! Besides, there'll
be no wrath for any of us--not even the worst! _Il y aura amnistie
générale!_ Papa told me so, and he'd been a clergyman, like Mr. Thomas
Bagot. I often think about God. I'm very fond of Him. One _must_ have
something perfect to look up to and be fond of--even if it's only an
idea!

"Though some people don't even believe He exists! Le père Martin
didn't--but, of course, _he_ was only a chiffonnier, and doesn't count.

"One day, though, Durien, the sculptor, who's very clever, and a very
good fellow indeed, said:

"'Vois-tu, Trilby--I'm very much afraid He doesn't really exist, le bon
Dieu! most unfortunately for _me_, for I _adore_ Him! I never do a piece
of work without thinking how nice it would be if I could only please
_Him_ with it!'

"And I've often thought, myself, how heavenly it must be to be able to
paint, or sculpt, or make music, or write beautiful poetry, for that
very reason!

"Why, once on a very hot afternoon we were sitting, a lot of us, in the
court-yard outside la mère Martin's shop, drinking coffee with an old
Invalide called Bastide Lendormi, one of the Vieille Garde, who'd only
got one leg and one arm and one eye, and everybody was very fond of him.
Well, a model called Mimi la Salope came out of the Mont-de-piété
opposite, and Père Martin called out to her to come and sit down, and
gave her a cup of coffee, and asked her to sing.

"She sang a song of Béranger's, about Napoleon the Great, in which it
says:

    "'Parlez-nous de lui, grandmère!
      Grandmère, parlez-nous de lui!'

I suppose she sang it very well, for it made old Bastide Lendormi cry;
and when Père Martin _blaguè'd_ him about it, he said,

"'C'est égal, voyez-vous! to sing like that is _to pray_!'

[Illustration: "'TO SING LIKE THAT IS _TO PRAY_!'"]

"And then I thought how lovely it would be if _I_ could only sing like
Mimi la Salope, and I've thought so ever since--just to _pray_!"

"_What!_ Trilby? if _you_ could only sing like--Oh, but never mind, I
forgot! Tell me, Trilby--do you ever pray to Him, as other people pray?"

"Pray to Him? Well, no--not often--not in words and on my knees and with
my hands together, you know! _Thinking's_ praying, very often--don't you
think so? And so's being sorry and ashamed when one's done a mean thing,
and glad when one's resisted a temptation, and grateful when it's a fine
day and one's enjoying one's self without hurting any one else! What is
it but praying when you try and bear up after losing all you cared to
live for? And very good praying too! There can be prayers without words
just as well as songs, I suppose; and Svengali used to say that songs
without words are the best!

"And then it seems mean to be always asking for things. Besides, you
don't get them any the faster that way, and that shows!

"La mère Martin used to be always praying. And Père Martin used always
to laugh at her; yet he always seemed to get the things _he_ wanted
oftenest!

"_I_ prayed once, very hard indeed! I prayed for Jeannot not to die!"

"Well--but how do you _repent_, Trilby, if you do not humble yourself,
and pray for forgiveness on your knees?"

"Oh, well--I don't exactly know! Look here, Mrs. Bagot, I'll tell you
the lowest and meanest thing I ever did...."

(Mrs. Bagot felt a little nervous.)

"I'd promised to take Jeannot on Palm-Sunday to St. Philippe du Roule,
to hear l'abbé Bergamot. But Durien (that's the sculptor, you know)
asked me to go with him to St. Germain, where there was a fair, or
something; and with Mathieu, who was a student in law; and a certain
Victorine Letellier, who--who was Mathieu's mistress, in fact. And I
went on Sunday morning to tell Jeannot that I couldn't take him.

"He cried so dreadfully that I thought I'd give up the others and take
him to St. Philippe, as I'd promised. But then Durien and Mathieu and
Victorine drove up and waited outside, and so I didn't take him, and
went with them, and I didn't enjoy anything all day, and was miserable.

"They were in an open carriage with two horses; it was Mathieu's treat;
and Jeannot might have ridden on the box by the coachman, without being
in anybody's way. But I was afraid they didn't want him, as they didn't
say anything, and so I didn't dare ask--and Jeannot saw us drive away,
and I _couldn't_ look back! And the worst of it is that when we were
half-way to St. Germain, Durien said, 'What a pity you didn't bring
Jeannot!' and they were all sorry I hadn't.

"It was six or seven years ago, and I really believe I've thought of it
almost every day, and sometimes in the middle of the night!

"Ah! and when Jeannot was dying! and when he was dead--the remembrance
of that Palm-Sunday!

"And if _that's_ not repenting, I don't know what is!"

"Oh, Trilby, what nonsense! _that's_ nothing; good heavens!--putting off
a small child! I'm thinking of far worse things--when you were in the
quartier latin, you know--sitting to painters and sculptors.... Surely,
so attractive as you are...."

"Oh yes.... I know what you mean--it was horrid, and I was frightfully
ashamed of myself; and it wasn't amusing a bit; _nothing_ was, till I
met your son and Taffy and dear Sandy McAlister! But then it wasn't
deceiving or disappointing anybody, or hurting their feelings--it was
only hurting myself!

"Besides, all that sort of thing, in women, is punished severely enough
down here, God knows! unless one's a Russian empress like Catherine the
Great, or a grande dame like lots of them, or a great genius like Madame
Rachel or George Sand!

[Illustration: "'THE REMEMBRANCE OF THAT PALM-SUNDAY!'"]

"Why, if it hadn't been for that, and sitting for the figure, I should
have felt myself good enough to marry your son, _although_ I was only a
blanchisseuse de fin--you've said so yourself!

"And I should have made him a good wife--of that I feel sure. He wanted
to live all his life at Barbizon, and paint, you know; and didn't care
for society in the least. Anyhow, I should have been equal to such a
life as that! Lots of their wives are blanchisseuses over there, or
people of that sort; and they get on very well indeed, and nobody
troubles about it!

"So I think I've been pretty well punished--richly as I've deserved to!"

"Trilby, have you ever been confirmed?"

"I forget. I fancy not!"

"Oh dear, oh dear! And do you know about our blessed Saviour, and the
Atonement and the Incarnation and the Resurrection...."

"Oh yes--I _used_ to, at least. I used to have to learn the Catechism on
Sundays--mamma made me. Whatever her faults and mistakes were, poor
mamma was always very particular about _that_! It all seemed very
complicated. But papa told me not to bother too much about it, but to be
good. He said that God would make it all right for us somehow, in the
end--all of us. And that seems sensible, _doesn't_ it?

"He told me to be good, and not to mind what priests and clergymen tell
us. He'd been a clergyman himself, and knew all about it, he said.

"I haven't been very good--there's not much doubt about that, I'm
afraid. But God knows I've repented often enough and sore enough; I do
now! But I'm rather glad to die, I think; and not a bit afraid--not a
scrap! I believe in poor papa, though he _was_ so unfortunate! He was
the cleverest man I ever knew, and the best--except Taffy and the Laird
and your dear son!

"There'll be no hell for any of us--he told me so--except what we make
for ourselves and each other down here; and that's bad enough for
anything. He told me that _he_ was responsible for me--he often said
so--and that mamma was too, and his parents for _him_, and his
grandfathers and grandmothers for _them_, and so on up to Noah and ever
so far beyond, and God for us all!

"He told me always to think of other people before myself, as Taffy
does, and your son; and never to tell lies or be afraid, and keep away
from drink, and I should be all right. But I've sometimes been all
wrong, all the same; and it wasn't papa's fault, but poor mamma's and
mine; and I've known it, and been miserable at the time, and after! and
I'm sure to be forgiven--perfectly certain--and so will everybody else,
even the wickedest that ever lived! Why, just give them sense enough in
the next world to understand all their wickedness in this, and that'll
punish them enough for anything, I think! That's simple enough, _isn't_
it? Besides, there may be _no_ next world--that's on the cards too, you
know!--and that will be simpler still!

"Not all the clergymen in all the world, not even the Pope of Rome, will
ever make me doubt papa, or believe in any punishment after what we've
all got to go through here! _Ce serait trop bête!_

"So that if you don't want me to very much, and he won't think it
unkind, I'd rather not talk to Mr. Thomas Bagot about it. I'd rather
talk to Taffy if I must. He's very clever, Taffy, though he doesn't
often say such clever things as your son does, or paint nearly so well;
and I'm sure he'll think papa was right."

And as a matter of fact the good Taffy, in his opinion on this solemn
subject, was found to be at one with the late Reverend Patrick Michael
O'Ferrall--and so was the Laird--and so (to his mother's shocked and
pained surprise) was Little Billee.

And so were Sir Oliver Calthorpe and Sir Jacob Wilcox and Doctor Thorne
and Antony and Lorrimer and the Greek!

And so--in after-years, when grief had well pierced and torn and riddled
her through and through, and time and age had healed the wounds, and
nothing remained but the consciousness of great inward scars of
recollection to remind her how deep and jagged and wide the wounds had
once been--did Mrs. Bagot herself!

       *       *       *       *       *

Late on one memorable Saturday afternoon, just as it was getting dusk in
Charlotte Street, Trilby, in her pretty blue dressing-gown, lay on the
sofa by the fire--her head well propped, her knees drawn up--looking
very placid and content.

She had spent the early part of the day dictating her will to the
conscientious Taffy.

It was a simple document, although she was not without many valuable
trinkets to leave: quite a fortune! Souvenirs from many men and women
she had charmed by her singing, from royalties downward.

She had been looking them over with the faithful Marta, to whom she had
always thought they belonged. It was explained to her that they were
gifts of Svengali's; since she did not remember when and where and by
whom they were presented to her, except a few that Svengali had given
her himself, with many passionate expressions of his love, which seems
to have been deep and constant and sincere; none the less so, perhaps,
that she could never return it!

She had left the bulk of these to the faithful Marta.

But to each of the trois Angliches she had bequeathed a beautiful ring,
which was to be worn by their brides if they ever married, and the
brides didn't object.

To Mrs. Bagot she left a pearl necklace; to Miss Bagot her gold coronet
of stars; and pretty (and most costly) gifts to each of the three
doctors who had attended her and been so assiduous in their care; and
who, as she was told, would make no charge for attending on Madame
Svengali. And studs and scarf-pins to Antony, Lorrimer, the Greek,
Dodor, and Zouzou; and to Carnegie a little German-silver vinaigrette
which had once belonged to Lord Witlow; and pretty souvenirs to the
Vinards, Angèle Boisse, Durien, and others.

And she left a magnificent gold watch and chain to Gecko, with a most
affectionate letter and a hundred pounds--which was all she had in money
of her own.

She had taken great interest in discussing with Taffy the particular
kind of trinket which would best suit the idiosyncrasy of each
particular legatee, and derived great comfort from the business-like and
sympathetic conscientiousness with which the good Taffy entered upon all
these minutiæ--he was so solemn and serious about it, and took such
pains. She little guessed how his dumb but deeply feeling heart was
harrowed!

This document had been duly signed and witnessed and intrusted to his
care; and Trilby lay tranquil and happy, and with a sense that nothing
remained for her but to enjoy the fleeting hour, and make the most of
each precious moment as it went by.

She was quite without pain of either mind or body, and surrounded by the
people she adored--Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billee, and Mrs. Bagot,
and Marta, who sat knitting in a corner with her black mittens on, and
her brass spectacles.

She listened to the chat and joined in it, laughing as usual; "love in
her eyes sat playing," as she looked from one to another, for she loved
them all beyond expression. "Love on her lips was straying, and warbling
in her breath," whenever she spoke; and her weakened voice was still
larger, fuller, softer than any other voice in the room, in the
world--of another kind, from another sphere.

A cart drove up, there was a ring at the door, and presently a wooden
packing-case was brought into the room.

At Trilby's request it was opened, and found to contain a large
photograph, framed and glazed, of Svengali, in the military uniform of
his own Hungarian band, and looking straight out of the picture,
straight at you. He was standing by his desk with his left hand turning
over a leaf of music, and waving his bâton with his right. It was a
splendid photograph, by a Viennese photographer, and a most speaking
likeness; and Svengali looked truly fine--all made up of importance and
authority, and his big black eyes were full of stern command.

[Illustration: FOR GECKO]

Marta trembled as she looked. It was handed to Trilby, who exclaimed
in surprise. She had never seen it. She had no photograph of him, and
had never possessed one.

No message of any kind, no letter of explanation, accompanied this
unexpected present, which, from the postmarks on the case, seemed to
have travelled all over Europe to London, out of some remote province in
eastern Russia--out of the mysterious East! The poisonous
East--birthplace and home of an ill wind that blows nobody good.

Trilby laid it against her legs as on a lectern, and lay gazing at it
with close attention for a long time, making a casual remark now and
then, as, "He was very handsome, I think"; or, "That uniform becomes him
very well. Why has he got it on, I wonder?"

[Illustration: "OUT OF THE MYSTERIOUS EAST"]

The others went on talking, and Mrs. Bagot made coffee.

Presently Mrs. Bagot took a cup of coffee to Trilby, and found her still
staring intently at the portrait, but with her eyes dilated, and quite a
strange light in them.

"Trilby, Trilby, your coffee! What is the matter, Trilby?"

Trilby was smiling, with fixed eyes, and made no answer.

The others got up and gathered round her in some alarm. Marta seemed
terror-stricken, and wished to snatch the photograph away, but was
prevented from doing so; one didn't know what the consequences might be.

Taffy rang the bell, and sent a servant for Dr. Thorne, who lived close
by, in Fitzroy Square.

Presently Trilby began to speak, quite softly, in French: "Encore une
fois? bon! je veux bien! avec la voix blanche alors, n'est-ce pas? et
puis foncer au milieu. Et pas trop vite en commençant! Battez bien la
mesure, Svengali--que je puisse bien voir--car il fait déjà nuit! c'est
ça! Allons, Gecko--donne-moi le ton!"

Then she smiled, and seemed to beat time softly by moving her head a
little from side to side, her eyes intent on Svengali's in the portrait,
and suddenly she began to sing Chopin's Impromptu in A flat.

She hardly seemed to breathe as the notes came pouring out, without
words--mere vocalizing. It was as if breath were unnecessary for so
little voice as she was using, though there was enough of it to fill the
room--to fill the house--to drown her small audience in holy, heavenly
sweetness.

She was a consummate mistress of her art. How that could be seen! And
also how splendid had been her training! It all seemed as easy to her as
opening and shutting her eyes, and yet how utterly impossible to anybody
else!

Between wonder, enchantment, and alarm they were frozen to statues--all
except Marta, who ran out of the room, crying: "Gott im Himmel! wieder
zurück! wieder zurück!"

She sang it just as she had sung it at the Salle des Bashibazoucks, only
it sounded still more ineffably seductive, as she was using less
voice--using the essence of her voice, in fact--the pure spirit, the
very cream of it.

There can be little doubt that these four watchers by that enchanted
couch were listening to not only the most divinely beautiful, but also
the most astounding feat of musical utterance ever heard out of a human
throat.

The usual effect was produced. Tears were streaming down the cheeks of
Mrs. Bagot and Little Billee. Tears were in the Laird's eyes, a tear on
one of Taffy's whiskers--tears of sheer delight.

When she came back to the quick movement again, after the adagio, her
voice grew louder and shriller, and sweet with a sweetness not of this
earth; and went on increasing in volume as she quickened the time,
nearing the end; and then came the dying away into all but nothing--a
mere melodic breath; and then the little soft chromatic ascending
rocket, up to E in alt, the last parting caress (which Svengali had
introduced as a finale, for it does not exist in the piano score).

When it was over, she said: "Ça y est-il, cette fois, Svengali? Ah! tant
mieux, à la fin! c'est pas malheureux! Et maintenant, mon ami, _je suis
fatiguée--bon soir_!"

Her head fell back on the pillow, and she lay fast asleep.

Mrs. Bagot took the portrait away gently. Little Billee knelt down and
held Trilby's hand in his and felt for her pulse, and could not find it.

He said, "Trilby! Trilby!" and put his ear to her mouth to hear her
breathe. Her breath was inaudible.

But soon she folded her hands across her breast, and uttered a little
short sigh, and in a weak voice said: "_Svengali.... Svengali....
Svengali!..._"

They remained in silence round her for several minutes, terror-stricken.

The doctor came; he put his hand to her heart, his ear to her lips. He
turned up one of her eyelids and looked at her eye. And then, his voice
quivering with strong emotion, he stood up and said, "Madame Svengali's
trials and sufferings are all over!"

"Oh, good God! is she _dead_?" cried Mrs. Bagot.

"Yes, Mrs. Bagot. She has been dead several minutes--perhaps a quarter
of an hour."


VINGT ANS APRÈS

PORTHOS-ATHOS, _alias_ Taffy Wynne, is sitting to breakfast (opposite
his wife) at a little table in the court-yard of that huge caravanserai
on the Boulevard des Capucines, Paris, where he had sat more than twenty
years ago with the Laird and Little Billee; where, in fact, he had
pulled Svengali's nose.

Little is changed in the aspect of the place: the same cosmopolite
company, with more of the American element, perhaps; the same arrivals
and departures in railway omnibuses, cabs, hired carriages; and, airing
his calves on the marble steps, stood just such another colossal and
beautiful old man in black cloth coat and knee-breeches and silk
stockings as of yore, with probably the very same pinchbeck chain. Where
do they breed these magnificent old Frenchmen? In Germany, perhaps,
"where all the good big waiters come from!"

And also the same fine weather. It is always fine weather in the
court-yard of the Grand Hôtel. As the Laird would say, they manage these
things better there!

Taffy wears a short beard, which is turning gray. His kind blue eye is
no longer choleric, but mild and friendly--as frank as ever; and full of
humorous patience. He has grown stouter; he is very big indeed, in all
three dimensions, but the symmetry and the gainliness of the athlete
belong to him still in movement and repose; and his clothes fit him
beautifully, though they are not new, and show careful beating and
brushing and ironing, and even a faint suspicion of all but
imperceptible fine-drawing here and there.

What a magnificent old man _he_ will make some day, should the Grand
Hôtel ever run short of them! He looks as if he could be trusted down to
the ground--in all things, little or big; as if his word were as good as
his bond, and even better; his wink as good as his word, his nod as good
as his wink; and, in truth, as he looks, so he is.

[Illustration: "'SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!... SVENGALI!...'"]

The most cynical disbeliever in "the grand old name of gentleman," and
its virtues as a noun of definition, would almost be justified in quite
dogmatically asserting at sight, and without even being introduced,
that, at all events, Taffy is a "gentleman," inside and out, up and
down--from the crown of his head (which is getting rather bald) to the
sole of his foot (by no means a small one, or a lightly shod--_ex pede
Herculem_)!

Indeed, this is always the first thing people say of Taffy--and the
last. It means, perhaps, that he may be a trifle dull. Well, one can't
be everything!

Porthos was a trifle dull--and so was Athos, I think; and likewise his
son, the faithful Viscount of Bragelonne--_bon chien chasse de race_!
And so was Wilfred of Ivanhoe, the disinherited; and Edgar, the Lord of
Ravenswood! and so, for that matter, was Colonel Newcome, of immortal
memory!

Yet who does not love them--who would not wish to be like them, for
better, for worse!

Taffy's wife is unlike Taffy in many ways; but (fortunately for both)
very like him in some. She is a little woman, very well shaped, very
dark, with black, wavy hair, and very small hands and feet; a very
graceful, handsome, and vivacious person; by no means dull; full,
indeed, of quick perceptions and intuitions; deeply interested in all
that is going on about and around her, and with always lots to say about
it, but not too much.

She distinctly belongs to the rare, and ever-blessed, and most precious
race of charmers.

She had fallen in love with the stalwart Taffy more than a quarter of a
century ago in the Place St. Anatole des Arts, where he and she and her
mother had tended the sick-couch of Little Billee--but she had never
told her love. _Tout vient à point, pour qui sait attendre!_

[Illustration: "TOUT VIENT À POINT, POUR QUI SAIT ATTENDRE!"]

That is a capital proverb, and sometimes even a true one. Blanche Bagot
had found it to be both!

       *       *       *       *       *

One terrible night, never to be forgotten, Taffy lay fast asleep in bed,
at his rooms in Jermyn Street, for he was very tired; grief tires more
than anything, and brings a deeper slumber.

That day he had followed Trilby to her last home in Kensal Green, with
Little Billee, Mrs. Bagot, the Laird, Antony, the Greek, and Durien (who
had come over from Paris on purpose) as chief mourners; and very many
other people, noble, famous, or otherwise, English and foreign; a
splendid and most representative gathering, as was duly chronicled in
all the newspapers here and abroad; a fitting ceremony to close the
brief but splendid career of the greatest pleasure-giver of our time.

He was awakened by a tremendous ringing at the street-door bell, as if
the house were on fire; and then there was a hurried scrambling up in
the dark, a tumbling over stairs and kicking against banisters, and
Little Billee had burst into his room, calling out: "Oh! Taffy, Taffy!
I'm g-going mad--I'm g-going m-mad! I'm d-d-done for...."

"All right, old fellow--just wait till I strike a light!"

"Oh, Taffy! I haven't slept for four nights--not a wink! She d-d-died
with Sv--Sv--Sv ... damn it, I can't get it out! that ruffian's name on
her lips!... it was just as if he were calling her from the t-t-tomb!
She recovered her senses the very minute she saw his photograph--she was
so f-fond of him she f-forgot everybody else! She's gone straight to
him, after all--in some other life!... to slave for him, and sing for
him, and help him to make better music than ever! Oh, T--T--oh--oh!
Taffy--oh! oh! oh! catch hold! c-c-catch...." And Little Billee had all
but fallen on the floor in a fit.

And all the old miserable business of five years before had begun over
again!

There has been too much sickness in this story, so I will tell as little
as possible of poor Little Billee's long illness, his slow and only
partial recovery, the paralysis of his powers as a painter, his quick
decline, his early death, his manly, calm, and most beautiful
surrender--the wedding of the moth with the star, of the night with the
morrow!

[Illustration: "I, PETE COELESTES...."]

For all but blameless as his short life had been, and so full of
splendid promise and performance, nothing ever became him better than
the way he left it. It was as if he were starting on some distant holy
quest, like some gallant knight of old--"A Bagot to the Rescue!" It
shook the infallibility of a certain vicar down to its very foundations,
and made him think more deeply about things than he had ever thought
yet. It gave him pause!... and so wrung his heart that when, at the
last, he stooped to kiss his poor young dead friend's pure white
forehead, he dropped a bigger tear on it than Little Billee (once so
given to the dropping of big tears) had ever dropped in his life.

But it is all too sad to write about.

It was by Little Billee's bedside, in Devonshire, that Taffy had grown
to love Blanche Bagot, and not very many weeks after it was all over
that Taffy had asked her to be his wife; and in a year they were
married, and a very happy marriage it turned out--the one thing that
poor Mrs. Bagot still looks upon as a compensation for all the griefs
and troubles of her life.

During the first year or two Blanche had perhaps been the most ardently
loving of this well-assorted pair. That beautiful look of love surprised
(which makes all women's eyes look the same) came into hers whenever she
looked at Taffy, and filled his heart with tender compunction, and a
queer sense of his own unworthiness.

Then a boy was born to them, and that look fell on the boy, and the good
Taffy caught it as it passed him by, and he felt a helpless, absurd
jealousy, that was none the less painful for being so ridiculous! and
then that look fell on another boy and yet another, so that it was
through these boys that she looked at their father. Then _his_ eyes
caught the look, and kept it for their own use; and he grew never to
look at his wife without it; and as no daughter came, she retained for
life the monopoly of that most sweet and expressive regard.

They are not very rich. He is a far better sportsman than he will ever
be a painter; and if he doesn't sell his pictures, it is not because
they are too good for the public taste: indeed, he has no illusions on
that score himself, even if his wife has! He is quite the least
conceited art-duffer I ever met--and I have met many far worse duffers
than Taffy.

Would only that I might kill off his cousin Sir Oscar, and Sir Oscar's
five sons (the Wynnes are good at sons), and his seventeen grandsons,
and the fourteen cousins (and their numerous male progeny), that stand
between Taffy and the baronetcy, and whatever property goes with it, so
that he might be Sir Taffy, and dear Blanche Bagot (that was) might be
called "my lady"! This Shakespearian holocaust would scarcely cost me a
pang!

It is a great temptation, when you have duly slain your first hero, to
enrich hero number two beyond the dreams of avarice, and provide him
with a title and a castle and park, as well as a handsome wife and a
nice family! But truth is inexorable--and, besides, they are just as
happy as they are.

They are well off enough, anyhow, to spend a week in Paris at last, and
even to stop at the Grand Hôtel! now that two of their sons are at
Harrow (where their father was before them), and the third is safe at a
preparatory school at Elstree, Herts.

It is their first outing since the honeymoon, and the Laird should have
come with them.

But the good Laird of Cockpen (who is now a famous Royal Academician) is
preparing for a honeymoon of his own. He has gone to Scotland to be
married himself--to wed a fair and clever country-woman of just a
suitable age, for he has known her ever since she was a bright little
lassie in short frocks, and he a promising A.R.A. (the pride of his
native Dundee)--a marriage of reason, and well-seasoned affection, and
mutual esteem--and therefore sure to turn out a happy one! and in
another fortnight or so the pair of them will very possibly be sitting
to breakfast opposite each other at that very corner table in the
court-yard of the Grand Hôtel! and she will laugh at everything he
says--and they will live happily ever after.

So much for hero number three--D'Artagnan! Here's to you, Sandy
McAlister, canniest, genialest, and most humorous of Scots! most
delicate, and dainty, and fanciful of British painters! "I trink your
health, mit your family's--may you lif long--and brosper!"

       *       *       *       *       *

So Taffy and his wife have come for their second honeymoon, their
Indian-summer honeymoon, alone; and are well content that it should be
so. Two's always company for such a pair--the amusing one and the
amusable!--and they are making the most of it!

They have been all over the quartier latin, and revisited the
well-remembered spots; and even been allowed to enter the old studio,
through the kindness of the concierge (who is no longer Madame Vinard).
It is tenanted by two American painters, who are coldly civil on being
thus disturbed in the middle of their work.

The studio is very spick and span, and most respectable. Trilby's foot,
and the poem, and the sheet of plate-glass have been improved away, and
a bookshelf put in their place. The new concierge (who has only been
there a year) knows nothing of Trilby, and of the Vinards, only that
they are rich and prosperous, and live somewhere in the south of France,
and that Monsieur Vinard is mayor of his commune. _Que le bon Dieu les
bénisse! c'étaient de bien braves gens._

Then Mr. and Mrs. Taffy have also been driven (in an open calèche with
two horses) through the Bois de Boulogne to St. Cloud; and to
Versailles, where they lunched at the Hôtel des Réservoirs--_parlez-moi
de ça_! and to St. Germain, and to Meudon (where they lunched at la loge
du garde champêtre--a new one); they have visited the Salon, the Louvre,
the porcelain manufactory at Sèvres, the Gobelins, the Hôtel Cluny, the
Invalides, with Napoleon's tomb, and seen half a dozen churches,
including Notre Dame and the Sainte Chapelle; and dined with the Dodors
at their charming villa near Asnières, and with the Zouzous at the
splendid Hôtel de la Rochemartel, and with the Duriens in the Parc
Monceau (Dodor's food was best and Zouzou's worst; and at Durien's the
company and talk were so good that one forgot to notice the food--and
that was a pity). And the young Dodors are all right--and so are the
young Duriens. As for the young Zouzous, there aren't any--and that's a
relief.

And they've been to the Variétés and seen Madame Chaumont, and to the
Français and seen Sarah Bernhardt and Côquelin and Delaunay, and to the
Opéra and heard Monsieur Lassalle.

And to-day being their last day, they are going to laze and flane about
the boulevards, and buy things, and lunch anywhere, "sur le pouce," and
do the Bois once more and see tout Paris, and dine early at Durand's, or
Bignon's (or else the Café des Ambassadeurs), and finish up the
well-spent day at the "Mouches d'Espagne"--the new theatre in the
Boulevard Poissonnière--to see Madame Cantharidi in "Petits Bonheurs de
Contrebande," which they are told is immensely droll and quite
proper--funny without being vulgar! Dodor was their informant--he had
taken Madame Dodor to see it three or four times.

Madame Cantharidi, as everybody knows, is a very clever but extremely
plain old woman with a cracked voice--of spotless reputation, and the
irreproachable mother of a grown-up family whom she has brought up in
perfection. They have never been allowed to see their mother (and
grandmother) act--not even the sons. Their excellent father (who adores
both them and her) has drawn the line at that!

In private life she is "quite the lady," but on the stage--well, go and
see her, and you will understand how she comes to be the idol of the
Parisian public. For she is the true and liberal dispenser to them of
that modern "esprit gaulois" which would make the good Rabelais turn
uneasily in his grave and blush there like a Benedictine Sister.

And truly she deserves the reverential love and gratitude of her chers
Parisiens! She amused them all through the Empire; during the _année
terrible_ she was their only stay and comfort, and has been their chief
delight ever since, and is now.

When they come back from _La Revanche_, may Madame Cantharidi be still
at her post, "Les mouches d'Espagne," to welcome the returning heroes,
and exult and crow with them in her funny cracked old voice; or, haply,
even console them once more, as the case may be.

[Illustration: "PETITS BONHEURS DE CONTREBANDE"]

"Victors or vanquished, they will laugh the same!"

Mrs. Taffy is a poor French scholar. One must know French very well
indeed (and many other things besides) to seize the subtle points of
Madame Cantharidi's play (and by-play)!

But Madame Cantharidi has so droll a face and voice, and such very
droll, odd movements that Mrs. Taffy goes into fits of laughter as soon
as the quaint little old lady comes on the stage. So heartily does she
laugh that a good Parisian bourgeois turns round and remarks to his
wife: "V'là une jolie p'tite Anglaise qui n'est pas bégueule, an moins!
Et l' gros bœuf avec les yeux bleus en boules de loto--c'est son
mari, sans doute! il n'a pas l'air trop content par exemple, celui-là!"

The fact is that the good Taffy (who knows French very well indeed) is
quite scandalized, and very angry with Dodor for sending them there; and
as soon as the first act is finished he means, without any fuss, to take
his wife away.

As he sits patiently, too indignant to laugh at what is really funny in
the piece (much of it is vulgar _without_ being funny), he finds himself
watching a little white-haired man in the orchestra, a fiddler, the
shape of whose back seems somehow familiar, as he plays an _obbligato_
accompaniment to a very broadly comic song of Madame Cantharidi's. He
plays beautifully--like a master--and the loud applause is as much for
him as for the vocalist.

Presently this fiddler turns his head so that his profile can be seen,
and Taffy recognizes him.

After five minutes' thought, Taffy takes a leaf out of his pocket-book
and writes (in perfectly grammatical French):

     "DEAR GECKO,--You have not forgotten Taffy Wynne, I hope; and
     Litrebili, and Litrebili's sister, who is now Mrs. Taffy Wynne. We
     leave Paris to-morrow, and would like very much to see you once
     more. Will you, after the play, come and sup with us at the Café
     Anglais? If so, look up and make 'yes' with the head, and enchant

     "Your well-devoted TAFFY WYNNE."

He gives this, folded, to an attendant--for "le premier violon--celui
qui a des cheveux blancs."

Presently he sees Gecko receive the note and read it and ponder for a
while.

Then Gecko looks round the theatre, and Taffy waves his handkerchief and
catches the eye of the premier violon, who "makes 'yes' with the head."

And then, the first act over, Mr. and Mrs. Wynne leave the theatre; Mr.
explaining why, and Mrs. very ready to go, as she was beginning to feel
strangely uncomfortable without quite realizing as yet what was amiss
with the lively Madame Cantharidi.

They went to the Café Anglais and bespoke a nice little room on the
entresol overlooking the boulevard, and ordered a nice little supper;
salmi of something very good, mayonnaise of lobster, and one or two
other dishes better still--and chambertin of the best. Taffy was
particular about these things on a holiday, and regardless of expense.
Porthos was very hospitable, and liked good food and plenty of it; and
Athos dearly loved good wine!

And then they went and sat at a little round table outside the Café de
la Paix on the boulevard, near the Grand Opéra, where it is always very
gay, and studied Paris life, and nursed their appetites till
supper-time.

At half-past eleven Gecko made his appearance--very meek and humble. He
looked old--ten years older than he really was--much bowed down, and as
if he had roughed it all his life, and had found living a desperate
long, hard grind.

He kissed Mrs. Taffy's hand, and seemed half inclined to kiss Taffy's
too, and was almost tearful in his pleasure at meeting them again, and
his gratitude at being asked to sup with them. He had soft, clinging,
caressing manners, like a nice dog's, that made you his friend at once.
He was obviously genuine and sincere, and quite pathetically simple, as
he always had been.

At first he could scarcely eat for nervous excitement; but Taffy's fine
example and Mrs. Taffy's genial, easy-going cordiality (and a couple of
glasses of chambertin) soon put him at his ease and woke up his dormant
appetite; which was a very large one, poor fellow!

He was told all about Little Billee's death, and deeply moved to hear
the cause which had brought it about, and then they talked of Trilby.

[Illustration: ENTER GECKO]

He pulled her watch out of his waistcoat-pocket and reverently kissed
it, exclaiming: "Ah! c'était un ange! un ange du Paradis! when I tell
you I lived with them for five years! Oh! her kindness, Dio, dio Maria!
It was 'Gecko this!' and 'Gecko that!' and 'Poor Gecko, your toothache,
how it worries me!' and 'Gecko, how tired and pale you look--you
distress me so, looking like that! Shall I mix you a maitrank?' And
'Gecko, you love artichokes à la Barigoule; they remind you of Paris--I
have heard you say so. Well, I have found out where to get artichokes,
and I know how to do them à la Barigoule, and you shall have them for
dinner to-day and to-morrow and all the week after!' and we did!

"Ach! dear kind one--what did I really care for artichokes à la
Barigoule?...

"And it was always like that--always--and to Svengali and old Marta just
the same! and she was never well--never! toujours souffrante!

"And it was she who supported us all--in luxury and splendor sometimes!"

"And _what_ an artist!" said Taffy.

"Ah, yes! but all that was Svengali, you know. Svengali was the greatest
artist I ever met! Monsieur, Svengali was a demon, a magician! I used to
think him a god! He found me playing in the streets for copper coins,
and took me by the hand, and was my only friend, and taught me all I
ever knew--and yet he could not play my instrument!

"And now he is dead, I have forgotten how to play it myself! That
English jail! it demoralized me, ruined me forever! ach! quel enfer, nom
de Dieu (pardon, madame)! I am just good enough to play the _obbligato_
at the Mouches d'Espagne, when the old Cantharidi sings,

    "'V'là mon mari qui r'garde
      Prends garde--ne m'chatouille plus!'

"It does not want much of an _obbligato_, hein, a song so noble and so
beautiful as that!

"And that song, monsieur, all Paris is singing it now. And that is the
Paris that went mad when Trilby sang the 'Nussbaum' of Schumann at the
Salle des Bashibazoucks. You heard her? Well!"

And here poor Gecko tried to laugh a little sardonic laugh in falsetto,
like Svengali's, full of scorn and bitterness--and very nearly
succeeded.

"But what made you strike him with--with that knife, you know?"

"Ah, monsieur, it had been coming on for a long time. He used to work
Trilby too hard; it was killing her--it killed her at last! And then at
the end he was unkind to her and scolded her and called her
names--horrid names--and then one day in London he struck her. He struck
her on the fingers with his bâton, and she fell down on her knees and
cried ...

"Monsieur, I would have defended Trilby against a locomotive going
grande vitesse! against my own father--against the Emperor of
Austria--against the Pope! and I am a good Catholic, monsieur! I would
have gone to the scaffold for her, and to the devil after!"

And he piously crossed himself.

"But, Svengali--wasn't _he_ very fond of her?"

"Oh yes, monsieur! quant à ça, passionately! But she did not love him as
he wished to be loved. She loved Litrebili, monsieur! Litrebili, the
brother of madame. And I suppose that Svengali grew angry and jealous at
last. He changed as soon as he came to Paris. Perhaps Paris reminded him
of Litrebili--and reminded Trilby, too!"

"But how on earth did Svengali ever manage to teach her how to sing
like that? She had no ear for music whatever when _we_ knew her!"

Gecko was silent for a while, and Taffy filled his glass, and gave him a
cigar, and lit one himself.

"Monsieur, no--that is true. She had not much ear. But she had such a
voice as had never been heard. Svengali knew that. He had found it out
long ago. Litolff had found it out, too. One day Svengali heard Litolff
tell Meyerbeer that the most beautiful female voice in Europe belonged
to an English grisette who sat as a model to sculptors in the quartier
latin, but that unfortunately she was quite tone-deaf, and couldn't sing
one single note in tune. Imagine how Svengali chuckled! I see it from
here!

"Well, we both taught her together--for three years--morning, noon, and
night--six--eight hours a day. It used to split me the heart to see her
worked like that! We took her voice note by note--there was no end to
her notes, each more beautiful than the other--velvet and gold,
beautiful flowers, pearls, diamonds, rubies--drops of dew and honey;
peaches, oranges, and lemons! en veux-tu en voilà!--all the perfumes and
spices of the Garden of Eden! Svengali with his little flexible
flageolet, I with my violin--that is how we taught her to make the
sounds--and then how to use them. She was a phénomène, monsieur! She
could keep on one note and make it go through all the colors in the
rainbow--according to the way Svengali looked at her. It would make you
laugh--it would make you cry--but, cry or laugh, it was the sweetest,
the most touching, the most beautiful note you ever heard--except all
her others! and each had as many overtones as the bells in the Carillon
de Notre Dame. She could run up and down the scales, chromatic scales,
quicker and better and smoother than Svengali on the piano, and more in
tune than any piano! and her shake--ach! twin stars, monsieur! She was
the greatest contralto, the greatest soprano the world has ever known!
the like of her has never been! the like of her will never be again! and
yet she only sang in public for two years.

[Illustration: "'WE TOOK HER VOICE NOTE BY NOTE'"]

"Ach! those breaks and runs and sudden leaps from darkness into light
and back again--from earth to heaven!... those slurs and swoops and
slides à la Paganini from one note to another, like a swallow
flying!... or a gull! Do you remember them? how they drove you mad? Let
any other singer in the world try to imitate them--they would make you
sick! That was Svengali ... he was a magician!

"And how she looked, singing! do you remember? her hands behind her--her
dear, sweet, slender foot on a little stool--her thick hair lying down
all along her back! And that good smile like the Madonna's so soft and
bright and kind! _Ach! Bel ucel di Dio!_ it was to make you weep for
love, merely to see her (_c'était à vous faire pleurer d'amour, rien que
de la voir_)! That was Trilby! Nightingale and bird-of-paradise in one!

"Enfin she could do anything--utter any sound she liked, when once
Svengali had shown her how--and he was the greatest master that ever
lived! and when once she knew a thing, she knew it. _Et voilà!_"

"How strange," said Taffy, "that she should have suddenly gone out of
her senses that night at Drury Lane, and so completely forgotten it all!
I suppose she saw Svengali die in the box opposite, and that drove her
mad!"

And then Taffy told the little fiddler about Trilby's death-song, like a
swan's, and Svengali's photograph. But Gecko had heard it all from
Marta, who was now dead.

Gecko sat and smoked and pondered for a while, and looked from one to
the other. Then he pulled himself together with an effort, so to speak,
and said, "Monsieur, she never went mad--not for one moment!"

"What! Do you mean to say she _deceived_ us all?"

"Non, monsieur! She could never deceive anybody, and never would. _She
had forgotten--voilà tout!_"

"But hang it all, my friend, one doesn't _forget_ such a--"

"Monsieur, listen! She is dead. And Svengali is dead--and Marta also.
And I have a good little malady that will kill me soon, _Gott sei
dank_--and without much pain.

"I will tell you a secret.

"_There were two Trilbys._ There was the Trilby you knew, who could not
sing one single note in tune. She was an angel of paradise. She is now!
But she had no more idea of singing than I have of winning a
steeple-chase at the croix de Berny. She could no more sing than a
fiddle can play itself! She could never tell one tune from another--one
note from the next. Do you remember how she tried to sing 'Ben Bolt'
that day when she first came to the studio in the Place St. Anatole des
Arts? It was droll, _hein? à se boucher les oreilles_! Well, that was
Trilby, your Trilby! that was my Trilby too--and I loved her as one
loves an only love, an only sister, an only child--a gentle martyr on
earth, a blessed saint in heaven! And that Trilby was enough for _me_!

"And that was the Trilby that loved your brother, madame--oh! but with
all the love that was in her! He did not know what he had lost, your
brother! Her love, it was immense, like her voice, and just as full of
celestial sweetness and sympathy! She told me everything! _ce pauvre
Litrebili, ce qu'il a perdu_!

"But all at once--pr-r-r-out! presto! augenblick!... with one wave of
his hand over her--with one look of his eye--with a word--Svengali could
turn her into the other Trilby, _his_ Trilby, and make her do whatever
he liked ... you might have run a red-hot needle into her and she would
not have felt it....

"He had but to say 'Dors!' and she suddenly became an unconscious Trilby
of marble, who could produce wonderful sounds--just the sounds he
wanted, and nothing else--and think his thoughts and wish his
wishes--and love him at his bidding with a strange unreal factitious
love ... just his own love for himself turned inside out--_à
l'envers_--and reflected back on him, as from a mirror ... _un écho, un
simulacre, quoi! pas autre chose!_.... It was not worth having! I was
not even jealous!

"Well, that was the Trilby he taught how to sing--and--and I helped him,
God of heaven forgive me! That Trilby was just a singing-machine--an
organ to play upon--an instrument of music--a Stradivarius--a flexible
flageolet of flesh and blood--a voice, and nothing more--just the
unconscious voice that Svengali sang with--for it takes two to sing like
la Svengali, monsieur--the one who has got the voice, and the one who
knows what to do with it.... So that when you heard her sing the
'Nussbaum,' the 'Impromptu,' you heard Svengali singing with her voice,
just as you hear Joachim play a chaconne of Bach with his fiddle!...
Herr Joachim's fiddle ... what does it know of Sebastian Bach? and as
for chaconnes ... _il s'en moque pas mal, ce fameux violon!_ ...

"And _our_ Trilby ... what did she know of Schumann, Chopin?--nothing at
all! She mocked herself not badly of Nussbaums and impromptus ... they
would make her yawn to demantibulate her jaws!... When Svengali's Trilby
was being taught to sing ... when Svengali's Trilby was singing--or
seemed to _you_ as if she were singing--_our_ Trilby had ceased to exist
... _our_ Trilby was fast asleep ... in fact, _our_ Trilby was
_dead_....

[Illustration: THE NIGHTINGALE'S FIRST SONG]

"Ah, monsieur ... that Trilby of Svengali's! I have heard her sing to
kings and queens in royal palaces!... as no woman has ever sung before
or since.... I have seen emperors and grand-dukes kiss her hand,
monsieur--and their wives and daughters kiss her lips, and weep....

"I have seen the horses taken out of her sledge and the pick of the
nobility drag her home to the hotel ... with torchlights and choruses
and shoutings of glory and long life to her!... and serenades all night,
under her window!... _she_ never knew! she heard nothing--felt
nothing--saw nothing! and she bowed to them, right and left, like a
queen!

"I have played the fiddle for her while she sang in the streets, at
fairs and festas and Kermessen ... and seen the people go mad to hear
her ... and once, at Prague, Svengali fell down in a fit from sheer
excitement! and then, suddenly, _our_ Trilby woke up and wondered what
it was all about ... and we took him home and put him to bed and left
him with Marta--and Trilby and I went together arm in arm all over the
town to fetch a doctor and buy things for supper--and that was the
happiest hour in all my life!

"Ach! what an existence! what travels! what triumphs! what adventures!
Things to fill a book--a dozen books--Those five happy years--with those
two Trilbys! what recollections!... I think of nothing else, night or
day ... even as I play the fiddle for old Cantharidi. Ach!... To think
how often I have played the fiddle for la Svengali ... to have done that
is to have lived ... and then to come home to Trilby ... _our_ Trilby
... the _real_ Trilby!... Got sei dank! Ich habe _geliebt und gelebet!
geliebt und gelebet! geliebt und gelebet!_ Cristo di Dio.... Sweet
sister in heaven.... Ô Dieu de Misère, ayez pitié de nous...."

       *       *       *       *       *

His eyes were red, and his voice was high and shrill and tremulous and
full of tears; these remembrances were too much for him; and perhaps
also the chambertin! He put his elbows on the table and hid his face in
his hands and wept, muttering to himself in his own language (Whatever
that might have been--Polish, probably) as if he were praying.

[Illustration: "'ICH HABE _GELIEBT UND GELEBET_!'"]

Taffy and his wife got up and leaned on the window-bar and looked out
on the deserted boulevards, where an army of scavengers, noiseless and
taciturn, was cleansing the asphalt roadway. The night above was dark,
but "star-dials hinted of morn," and a fresh breeze had sprung up,
making the leaves dance and rustle on the sycamore-trees along the
Boulevard--a nice little breeze; just the sort of little breeze to do
Paris good. A four-wheel cab came by at a foot pace, the driver humming
a tune; Taffy hailed him; he said, "V'là, m'sieur!" and drew up.

Taffy rang the bell, and asked for the bill, and paid it. Gecko had
apparently fallen asleep. Taffy gently woke him up, and told him how
late it was. The poor little man seemed dazed and rather tipsy, and
looked older than ever; sixty, seventy--any age you like. Taffy helped
him on with his great-coat, and, taking him by the arm, led him
down-stairs, giving him his card, and telling him how glad he was to
have seen him, and that he would write to him from England--a promise
which was kept, one may be sure.

Gecko uncovered his fuzzy white head, and took Mrs. Taffy's hand and
kissed it, and thanked her warmly for her "si bon et sympathique
accueil."

Then Taffy all but lifted him into the cab, the jolly cabman saying:

"Ah! bon--connais bien, celui là; vous savez--c'est lui qui joue du
violon aux Mouches d'Espagne! Il a soupé, l'bourgeois; n'est-ce pas,
m'sieur? 'petits bonheurs de contrebande,' hein?... ayez pas peur! on
vous aura soin de lui! il joue joliment bien, m'sieur; n'est-ce pas?"

Taffy shook Gecko's hand, and asked,

"Où restez-vous, Gecko?"

"Quarante-huit, Rue des Pousse-cailloux, au cinquième."

"How strange!" said Taffy to his wife--"how touching! why, that's where
Trilby used to live--the very number! the very floor!"

"Oui, oui," said Gecko, waking up; "c'est l'ancienne mansarde à
Trilby--j'y suis depuis douze ans--_j'y suis, j'y reste_...."

And he laughed feebly at his mild little joke.

Taffy told the address to the cabman, and gave him five francs.

"Merci, m'sieur! C'est de l'aut' côté de l'eau--près de la Sorbonne,
s'pas? On vous aura soin du bourgeois; soyez tranquille--ayez pas peur!
quarante-huit; on y va! Bonsoir, monsieur et dame!" And he clacked his
whip and rattled away, singing:

    "V'là mon mari qui r'garde--
       Prends garde!
     Ne m'chatouill' plus!"

Mr. and Mrs. Wynne walked back to the hotel, which was not far. She hung
on to his big arm and crept close to him, and shivered a little. It was
quite chilly. Their footsteps were very audible in the stillness;
"pit-pat, flopety-clop," otherwise they were both silent. They were
tired, yawny, sleepy, and very sad; and each was thinking (and knew the
other was thinking) that a week in Paris was just enough--and how nice
it would be, in just a few hours more, to hear the rooks cawing round
their own quiet little English country home--where three jolly boys
would soon be coming for the holidays.

And there we will leave them to their useful, hum-drum, happy domestic
existence--than which there is no better that I know of, at their time
of life--and no better time of life than theirs!

    "_Où peut-on être mieux qu'au sein de ta famille?_"

That blessed harbor of refuge well within our reach, and having really
cut our wisdom teeth at last, and learned the ropes, and left off
hankering after the moon--we can do with so little down here....

    A little work, a little play
    To keep us going--and so, good-day!

    A little warmth, a little light
    Of love's bestowing--and so, good-night!

    A little fun, to match the sorrow
    Of each day's growing--and so, good-morrow!

    A little trust that when we die
    We reap our sowing! And so--good-bye!

[Illustration]


BY GEORGE DU MAURIER

THE MARTIAN. A Novel. Illustrated by the Author. Post 8vo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1 75; Three-quarter Calf, $3 50; Three-quarter Crushed
Levant, $4 50; _Edition de Luxe_. Full Vellum, $10 00. (A Glossary of
the French and Latin expressions in the story is included.)

SOCIAL PICTORIAL SATIRE. Reminiscences and Appreciations of English
Illustrators of the Past Generation. With Illustrations by the Author
and Others. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50.

A LEGEND OF CAMELOT. Pictures and Verses. Oblong 4to, Cloth, Ornamental,
Full Gilt, $5 00.

TRILBY. A Novel. Illustrated by the Author. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental,
$1 75; Three-quarter Calf, $3 50; Three-quarter Crushed Levant, $4 50.

PETER IBBETSON. With an Introduction by his Cousin, Lady **** ("Madge
Plunket"). Edited and Illustrated by GEORGE DU MAURIER. Post 8vo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1 50. Three-quarter Calf. $3 25; Three-quarter Crushed
Levant, $4 25.

ENGLISH SOCIETY. Sketched by GEORGE DU MAURIER. About 100 Illustrations.
With an Introduction by W. D. HOWELLS. Oblong 4to, Cloth, Ornamental, $2
50

Mr. du Maurier's style has much distinction--a blending of refinement
and unconventionality that is delightful. It is vehemently alive,
moreover; there is not a word which could be spared without marring the
effect, not a line which does not fall into rank with vigorous step. It
has poetic grace, too, a musical and witching rhythm here and
there.--_New York Tribune._


HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

☞_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price._


BY RICHARD HARDING DAVIS

A YEAR FROM A REPORTER'S NOTE-BOOK. Illustrated by R. CATON WOODVILLE,
T. DE THULSTRUP, and FREDERIC REMINGTON, and from Photographs taken by
the Author. $1 50.

THREE GRINGOS IN VENEZUELA AND CENTRAL AMERICA. Illustrated. $1 50.

ABOUT PARIS. Illustrated by C. D. GIBSON. $1 25.

THE PRINCESS ALINE. Illustrated by C. D. GIBSON. $1 25.

THE EXILES, AND OTHER STORIES. Illustrated. $1 50.

VAN BIBBER, AND OTHERS. Illustrated by C. D. GIBSON. $1 00; Paper, 60
cents.

THE WEST FROM A CAR-WINDOW. Illustrated by FREDERIC REMINGTON. $1 25.

OUR ENGLISH COUSINS. Illustrated. $1 25.

THE RULERS OF THE MEDITERRANEAN. Illustrated. $1 25.

_Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental_

Mr. Davis has eyes to see, is not a bit afraid to tell what he sees, and
is essentially good natured.... Mr. Davis's faculty of appreciation and
enjoyment is fresh and strong: he makes vivid pictures.--_Outlook._ N.
Y.

Richard Harding Davis never writes a short story that he does not prove
himself a master of the art.--_Chicago Times._


HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON

☞_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price._

BY JOHN KENDRICK BANGS

THE DREAMERS: A CLUB. Illustrated by EDWARD PENFIELD. Uncut Edges and
Colored Top.

PEEPS AT PEOPLE. Passages from the writings of Anne Warrington Witherup,
Journalist. Illustrated by EDWARD PENFIELD.

GHOSTS I HAVE MET, and Some Others. Illustrated by PETER NEWELL.

A HOUSE-BOAT ON THE STYX. Being Some Account of the Divers Doings of the
Associated Shades. Illustrated.

THE PURSUIT OF THE HOUSE-BOAT. Being Some Further Account of the Doings
of the Associated Shades, under the Leadership of Sherlock Holmes, Esq.
Illustrated by PETER NEWELL.

THE BICYCLERS, and Three Other Farces. Illustrated.

A REBELLIOUS HEROINE. Illustrated.

MR. BONAPARTE OF CORSICA. Illustrated by H. W. MCVICKAR.

THE WATER GHOST, and Others. Illustrated. (16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1
25 per volume.)

PASTE JEWELS. Being Seven Tales of Domestic Woe. With an Illustration.
16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 00.

THE IDIOT. Illustrated. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 00.

THREE WEEKS IN POLITICS. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental, 60 cents.

COFFEE AND REPARTEE. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, Ornamental, 50 cents.

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

☞_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price_.


BY H. G. WELLS

WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 50.

"This romance of the twenty-second century," as the London _Daily
Telegraph_ says, "will prove absolutely enthralling. The hero goes into
a trance in 1900, and when he awakes two centuries later he finds that
his property has increased so greatly that he owns more than half the
world."

THIRTY STRANGE STORIES. _New Edition._ Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1
50.

Creepy, ingenious, original, and more than clever they all are. They
fascinate you like the eye of a snake.... It would be impossible to find
a group of stories that will give the reader more sensations, or hold
his attention more firmly.--_Boston Herald._

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS. With Illustrations. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental,
$1 50.

One of the conspicuous books of the year, from its striking originality
of title and plot.--_Washington Times._

THE INVISIBLE MAN. A Grotesque Romance. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1
00.

In his audacious imaginative insight into the romantic possibilities
underlying the discoveries or the suggestion of modern science Mr. Wells
stands unrivalled.... It is just like a transcript from real life,
recalling the best work of Poe in its accent of sincerity and surpassing
it in its felicity of style.--_The Spectator_, London.

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

☞_Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price._

       *       *       *       *       *

The following typographical errors have been corrected by the etext
transcriber:

Stendahl and George Sand=>Stendhal and George Sand

déjà debout après heir soir?=>déjà debout après hier soir?

Madame Boisse's, in the Rue des Cloitres Ste. Pétronille.=>Madame
Boisse's, in the Rue des Cloîtres Ste. Pétronille.

But the mere sight of a boxing-glove make him sick=>But the mere sight
of a boxing-glove made him sick

excuted a series of cancan steps=>executed a series of cancan steps

"A--a--its the _Origin of Species_, by Charles Darwin.=>"A--a--it's the
_Origin of Species_, by Charles Darwin.

Pavilon de Flore=>Pavillon de Flore

Quelle nouvelles apportez=>Quelles nouvelles apportez

the hum of lively talk was great, and "la Sevengali" was in every
mouth=>the hum of lively talk was great, and "la Svengali" was in every
mouth

beautiful blue barouch with C springs=>beautiful blue barouche with C
springs

Then M. Carrell came every day to chat with his favorite pupil=>Then M.
Carrel came every day to chat with his favorite pupil

Trilbiness=>Trilbyness

Tireliard=>Tire-Liard




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





JACK AND JILL

By Louisa May Alcott



   To the schoolmates of ELLSWORTH DEVENS,
   Whose lovely character will not soon be forgotten,
   This Village Story is affectionately inscribed by their friend,

   L.M.A.
   1880



Contents

     Chapter I      The Catastrophe
     Chapter II     Two Penitents
     Chapter III    Ward No. I
     Chapter IV     Ward No. 2
     Chapter V      Secrets
     Chapter VI     Surprises
     Chapter VII    Jill's Mission
     Chapter VIII   Merry and Molly
     Chapter IX     The Debating Club
     Chapter X      The Dramatic Club
     Chapter XI     “Down Brakes”
      Chapter XII    The Twenty-second of February
     Chapter XIII   Jack Has a Mystery
     Chapter XIV    And Jill Finds it out
     Chapter XV     Saint Lucy
     Chapter XVI    Up at Merry's
     Chapter XVII   Down at Molly's
     Chapter XVIII  May Baskets
     Chapter XIX    Good Templars
     Chapter XX     A Sweet Memory
     Chapter XXI    Pebbly Beach
     Chapter XXII   A Happy Day
     Chapter XXIII  Cattle Show
     Chapter XXIV   Down the River





JACK AND JILL


    Jack and Jill went up the hill
    To coast with fun and laughter;
    Jack fell down and broke his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after.




Chapter I. The Catastrophe


“Clear the lulla!” was the general cry on a bright December afternoon,
when all the boys and girls of Harmony Village were out enjoying the
first good snow of the season. Up and down three long coasts they went
as fast as legs and sleds could carry them. One smooth path led into the
meadow, and here the little folk congregated; one swept across the pond,
where skaters were darting about like water-bugs; and the third, from
the very top of the steep hill, ended abruptly at a rail fence on the
high bank above the road. There was a group of lads and lasses sitting
or leaning on this fence to rest after an exciting race, and, as they
reposed, they amused themselves with criticising their mates, still
absorbed in this most delightful of out-door sports.

“Here comes Frank Minot, looking as solemn as a judge,” cried one, as
a tall fellow of sixteen spun by, with a set look about the mouth and
a keen sparkle of the eyes, fixed on the distant goal with a do-or-die
expression.

  “Here's Molly Loo
  And little Boo!”

sang out another; and down came a girl with flying hair, carrying a
small boy behind her, so fat that his short legs stuck out from the
sides, and his round face looked over her shoulder like a full moon.

“There's Gus Burton; doesn't he go it?” and such a very long boy whizzed
by, that it looked almost as if his heels were at the top of the hill
when his head was at the bottom!

“Hurrah for Ed Devlin!” and a general shout greeted a sweet-faced lad,
with a laugh on his lips, a fine color on his brown cheek, and a gay
word for every girl he passed.

“Laura and Lotty keep to the safe coast into the meadow, and Molly Loo
is the only girl that dares to try this long one to the pond. I wouldn't
for the world; the ice can't be strong yet, though it is cold enough to
freeze one's nose off,” said a timid damsel, who sat hugging a post and
screaming whenever a mischievous lad shook the fence.

“No, she isn't; here's Jack and Jill going like fury.”

  “Clear the track
  For jolly Jack!”

sang the boys, who had rhymes and nicknames for nearly every one.

Down came a gay red sled, bearing a boy who seemed all smile and
sunshine, so white were his teeth, so golden was his hair, so bright
and happy his whole air. Behind him clung a little gypsy of a girl, with
black eyes and hair, cheeks as red as her hood, and a face full of fun
and sparkle, as she waved Jack's blue tippet like a banner with one
hand, and held on with the other.

“Jill goes wherever Jack does, and he lets her. He's such a good-natured
chap, he can't say 'No.'”

“To a girl,” slyly added one of the boys, who had wished to borrow the
red sled, and had been politely refused because Jill wanted it.

“He's the nicest boy in the world, for he never gets mad,” said the
timid young lady, recalling the many times Jack had shielded her from
the terrors which beset her path to school, in the shape of cows, dogs,
and boys who made faces and called her “'Fraid-cat.”

“He doesn't dare to get mad with Jill, for she'd take his head off
in two minutes if he did,” growled Joe Flint, still smarting from the
rebuke Jill had given him for robbing the little ones of their safe
coast because he fancied it.

“She wouldn't! she's a dear! _You_ needn't sniff at her because she is
poor. She's ever so much brighter than you are, or she wouldn't always
be at the head of your class, old Joe,” cried the girls, standing by
their friend with a unanimity which proved what a favorite she was.

Joe subsided with as scornful a curl to his nose as its chilly state
permitted, and Merry Grant introduced a subject of general interest by
asking abruptly,--

“Who is going to the candy-scrape to-night?”

“All of us. Frank invited the whole set, and we shall have a tip-top
time. We always do at the Minots',” cried Sue, the timid trembler.

“Jack said there was a barrel of molasses in the house, so there would
be enough for all to eat and some to carry away. They know how to do
things handsomely;” and the speaker licked his lips, as if already
tasting the feast in store for him.

“Mrs. Minot is a mother worth having,” said Molly Loo, coming up with
Boo on the sled; and she knew what it was to need a mother, for she had
none, and tried to care for the little brother with maternal love and
patience.

“She is just as sweet as she can be!” declared Merry, enthusiastically.

“Especially when she has a candy-scrape,” said Joe, trying to be
amiable, lest he should be left out of the party.

Whereat they all laughed, and went gayly away for a farewell frolic, as
the sun was setting and the keen wind nipped fingers and toes as well as
noses.

Down they went, one after another, on the various coasts,--solemn Frank,
long Gus, gallant Ed, fly-away Molly Loo, pretty Laura and Lotty, grumpy
Joe, sweet-faced Merry with Sue shrieking wildly behind her, gay Jack
and gypsy Jill, always together,--one and all bubbling over with the
innocent jollity born of healthful exercise. People passing in the road
below looked up and smiled involuntarily at the red-cheeked lads and
lasses, filling the frosty air with peals of laughter and cries of
triumph as they flew by in every conceivable attitude; for the fun was
at its height now, and the oldest and gravest observers felt a glow of
pleasure as they looked, remembering their own young days.

“Jack, take me down that coast. Joe said I wouldn't dare to do it, so I
must,” commanded Jill, as they paused for breath after the long trudge
up hill. Jill, of course, was not her real name, but had been given
because of her friendship with Jack, who so admired Janey Pecq's spirit
and fun.

“I guess I wouldn't. It is very bumpy and ends in a big drift; not half
so nice as this one. Hop on and we'll have a good spin across the
pond;” and Jack brought “Thunderbolt” round with a skilful swing and an
engaging air that would have won obedience from anybody but wilful Jill.

“It is very nice, but I won't be told I don't 'dare' by any boy in the
world. If you are afraid, I'll go alone.” And, before he could speak,
she had snatched the rope from his hand, thrown herself upon the sled,
and was off, helter-skelter, down the most dangerous coast on the
hill-side.

She did not get far, however; for, starting in a hurry, she did not
guide her steed with care, and the red charger landed her in the snow
half-way down, where she lay laughing till Jack came to pick her up.

“If you _will_ go, I'll take you down all right. I'm not afraid, for
I've done it a dozen times with the other fellows; but we gave it up
because it is short and bad,” he said, still good-natured, though a
little hurt at the charge of cowardice; for Jack was as brave as a
little lion, and with the best sort of bravery,--the courage to do
right.

“So it is; but I _must_ do it a few times, or Joe will plague me and
spoil my fun to-night,” answered Jill, shaking her skirts and rubbing
her blue hands, wet and cold with the snow.

“Here, put these on; I never use them. Keep them if they fit; I only
carry them to please mother.” And Jack pulled out a pair of red mittens
with the air of a boy used to giving away.

“They are lovely warm, and they do fit. Must be too small for your paws,
so I'll knit you a new pair for Christmas, and make you wear them, too,”
 said Jill, putting on the mittens with a nod of thanks, and ending her
speech with a stamp of her rubber boots to enforce her threat.

Jack laughed, and up they trudged to the spot whence the three coasts
diverged.

“Now, which will you have?” he asked, with a warning look in the honest
blue eyes which often unconsciously controlled naughty Jill against her
will.

“That one!” and the red mitten pointed firmly to the perilous path just
tried.

“You will do it?”

“I will!”

“Come on, then, and hold tight.”

Jack's smile was gone now, and he waited without a word while Jill
tucked herself up, then took his place in front, and off they went on
the brief, breathless trip straight into the drift by the fence below.

“I don't see anything very awful in that. Come up and have another.
Joe is watching us, and I'd like to show him that _we_ aren't afraid of
anything,” said Jill, with a defiant glance at a distant boy, who had
paused to watch the descent.

“It is a regular 'go-bang,' if that is what you like,” answered Jack, as
they plowed their way up again.

“It is. You boys think girls like little mean coasts without any fun or
danger in them, as if we couldn't be brave and strong as well as you.
Give me three go-bangs and then we'll stop. My tumble doesn't count, so
give me two more and then I'll be good.”

Jill took her seat as she spoke, and looked up with such a rosy,
pleading face that Jack gave in at once, and down they went again,
raising a cloud of glittering snow-dust as they reined up in fine style
with their feet on the fence.

“It's just splendid! Now, one more!” cried Jill, excited by the cheers
of a sleighing party passing below.

Proud of his skill, Jack marched back, resolved to make the third “go”
 the crowning achievement of the afternoon, while Jill pranced after him
as lightly as if the big boots were the famous seven-leagued ones, and
chattering about the candy-scrape and whether there would be nuts or
not.

So full were they of this important question, that they piled on
hap-hazard, and started off still talking so busily that Jill forgot to
hold tight and Jack to steer carefully. Alas, for the candy-scrape that
never was to be! Alas, for poor “Thunderbolt” blindly setting forth
on the last trip he ever made! And oh, alas, for Jack and Jill, who
wilfully chose the wrong road and ended their fun for the winter! No
one knew how it happened, but instead of landing in the drift, or at the
fence, there was a great crash against the bars, a dreadful plunge off
the steep bank, a sudden scattering of girl, boy, sled, fence, earth,
and snow, all about the road, two cries, and then silence.

“I knew they'd do it!” and, standing on the post where he had perched,
Joe waved his arms and shouted: “Smash-up! Smash-up! Run! Run!” like a
raven croaking over a battlefield when the fight was done.

Down rushed boys and girls ready to laugh or cry, as the case might be,
for accidents will happen on the best-regulated coasting-grounds. They
found Jack sitting up looking about him with a queer, dazed expression,
while an ugly cut on the forehead was bleeding in a way which sobered
the boys and frightened the girls half out of their wits.

“He's killed! He's killed!” wailed Sue, hiding her face and beginning to
cry.

“No, I'm not. I'll be all right when I get my breath. Where's Jill?”
 asked Jack, stoutly, though still too giddy to see straight.

The group about him opened, and his comrade in misfortune was discovered
lying quietly in the snow with all the pretty color shocked out of her
face by the fall, and winking rapidly, as if half stunned. But no wounds
appeared, and when asked if she was dead, she answered in a vague sort
of way,--

“I guess not. Is Jack hurt?”

“Broken his head,” croaked Joe, stepping aside, that she might behold
the fallen hero vainly trying to look calm and cheerful with red drops
running down his cheek and a lump on his forehead.

Jill shut her eyes and waved the girls away, saying, faintly,--

“Never mind me. Go and see to him.”

“Don't! I'm all right,” and Jack tried to get up in order to prove that
headers off a bank were mere trifles to him; but at the first movement
of the left leg he uttered a sharp cry of pain, and would have fallen if
Gus had not caught and gently laid him down.

“What is it, old chap?” asked Frank, kneeling beside him, really alarmed
now, the hurts seeming worse than mere bumps, which were common affairs
among baseball players, and not worth much notice.

“I lit on my head, but I guess I've broken my leg. Don't frighten
mother,” and Jack held fast to Frank's arm as he looked into the anxious
face bent over him; for, though the elder tyrannized over the younger,
the brothers loved one another dearly.

“Lift his head, Frank, while I tie my handkerchief round to stop the
bleeding,” said a quiet voice, as Ed Devlin laid a handful of soft snow
on the wound; and Jack's face brightened as he turned to thank the one
big boy who never was rough with the small ones.

“Better get him right home,” advised Gus, who stood by looking on, with
his little sisters Laura and Lotty clinging to him.

“Take Jill, too, for it's my opinion she has broken her back. She can't
stir one bit,” announced Molly Loo, with a droll air of triumph, as if
rather pleased than otherwise to have her patient hurt the worse; for
Jack's wound was very effective, and Molly had a taste for the tragic.

This cheerful statement was greeted with a wail from Susan and howls
from Boo, who had earned that name from the ease with which, on all
occasions, he could burst into a dismal roar without shedding a tear,
and stop as suddenly as he began.

“Oh, I am so sorry! It was my fault; I shouldn't have let her do it,”
 said Jack, distressfully.

“It was all _my_ fault; I made him. If I'd broken every bone I've got,
it would serve me right. Don't help me, anybody; I'm a wicked thing, and
I deserve to lie here and freeze and starve and die!” cried Jill, piling
up punishments in her remorseful anguish of mind and body.

“But we want to help you, and we can settle about blame by and by,”
 whispered Merry with a kiss; for she adored dashing Jill, and never
would own that she did wrong.

“Here come the wood-sleds just in time. I'll cut away and tell one of
them to hurry up.” And, freeing himself from his sisters, Gus went off
at a great pace, proving that the long legs carried a sensible head as
well as a kind heart.

As the first sled approached, an air of relief pervaded the agitated
party, for it was driven by Mr. Grant, a big, benevolent-looking farmer,
who surveyed the scene with the sympathetic interest of a man and a
father.

“Had a little accident, have you? Well, that's a pretty likely place for
a spill. Tried it once myself and broke the bridge of my nose,” he said,
tapping that massive feature with a laugh which showed that fifty years
of farming had not taken all the boy out of him. “Now then, let's see
about this little chore, and lively, too, for it's late, and these
parties ought to be housed,” he added, throwing down his whip, pushing
back his cap, and nodding at the wounded with a reassuring smile.

“Jill first, please, sir,” said Ed, the gentle squire of dames,
spreading his overcoat on the sled as eagerly as ever Raleigh laid down
his velvet cloak for a queen to walk upon.

“All right. Just lay easy, my dear, and I won't hurt you a mite if I can
help it.”

Careful as Mr. Grant was, Jill could have screamed with pain as he
lifted her; but she set her lips and bore it with the courage of a
little Indian; for all the lads were looking on, and Jill was proud to
show that a girl could bear as much as a boy. She hid her face in the
coat as soon as she was settled, to hide the tears that would come, and
by the time Jack was placed beside her, she had quite a little cistern
of salt water stored up in Ed's coat-pocket.

Then the mournful procession set forth, Mr. Grant driving the oxen, the
girls clustering about the interesting invalids on the sled, while the
boys came behind like a guard of honor, leaving the hill deserted by
all but Joe, who had returned to hover about the fatal fence, and poor
“Thunderbolt,” split asunder, lying on the bank to mark the spot where
the great catastrophe occurred.




Chapter II. Two Penitents


Jack and Jill never cared to say much about the night which followed
the first coasting party of the season, for it was the saddest and the
hardest their short lives had ever known. Jack suffered most in body;
for the setting of the broken leg was such a painful job, that it wrung
several sharp cries from him, and made Frank, who helped, quite weak
and white with sympathy, when it was over. The wounded head ached
dreadfully, and the poor boy felt as if bruised all over, for he had the
worst of the fall. Dr. Whiting spoke cheerfully of the case, and made so
light of broken legs, that Jack innocently asked if he should not be up
in a week or so.

“Well, no; it usually takes twenty-one days for bones to knit, and young
ones make quick work of it,” answered the doctor, with a last scientific
tuck to the various bandages, which made Jack feel like a hapless
chicken trussed for the spit.

“Twenty-one days! Three whole weeks in bed! I shouldn't call that quick
work,” groaned the dismayed patient, whose experience of illness had
been limited.

“It is a forty days' job, young man, and you must make up your mind to
bear it like a hero. We will do our best; but next time, look before
you leap, and save your bones. Good-night; you'll feel better in the
morning. No jigs, remember;” and off went the busy doctor for another
look at Jill, who had been ordered to bed and left to rest till the
other case was attended to.

Any one would have thought Jack's plight much the worse, but the
doctor looked more sober over Jill's hurt back than the boy's compound
fractures; and the poor little girl had a very bad quarter of an hour
while he was trying to discover the extent of the injury.

“Keep her quiet, and time will show how much damage is done,” was all
he said in her hearing; but if she had known that he told Mrs. Pecq he
feared serious consequences, she would not have wondered why her mother
cried as she rubbed the numb limbs and placed the pillows so tenderly.

Jill suffered most in her mind; for only a sharp stab of pain now and
then reminded her of her body; but her remorseful little soul gave her
no peace for thinking of Jack, whose bruises and breakages her lively
fancy painted in the darkest colors.

“Oh, don't be good to me, Mammy; I made him go, and now he's hurt
dreadfully, and may die; and it is all my fault, and everybody ought to
hate me,” sobbed poor Jill, as a neighbor left the room after reporting
in a minute manner how Jack screamed when his leg was set, and how Frank
was found white as a sheet, with his head under the pump, while Gus
restored the tone of his friend's nerves, by pumping as if the house was
on fire.

“Whist, my lass, and go to sleep. Take a sup of the good wine Mrs. Minot
sent, for you are as cold as a clod, and it breaks my heart to see my
Janey so.”

“I can't go to sleep; I don't see how Jack's mother could send me
anything when I've half killed him. I want to be cold and ache and have
horrid things done to me. Oh, if I ever get out of this bed I'll be the
best girl in the world, to pay for this. See if I ain't!” and Jill
gave such a decided nod that her tears flew all about the pillow like a
shower.

“You'd better begin at once, for you won't get out of that bed for a
long while, I'm afraid, my lamb,” sighed her mother, unable to conceal
the anxiety that lay so heavy on her heart.

“Am I hurt badly, Mammy?”

“I fear it, lass.”

“I'm _glad_ of it; I ought to be worse than Jack, and I hope I am. I'll
bear it well, and be good right away. Sing, Mammy, and I'll try to go to
sleep to please you.”

Jill shut her eyes with sudden and unusual meekness, and before her
mother had crooned half a dozen verses of an old ballad, the little
black head lay still upon the pillow, and repentant Jill was fast asleep
with a red mitten in her hand.

Mrs. Pecq was an Englishwoman who had left Montreal at the death of her
husband, a French Canadian, and had come to live in the tiny cottage
which stood near Mrs. Minot's big house, separated only by an
arbor-vitae hedge. A sad, silent person, who had seen better days, but
said nothing about them, and earned her bread by sewing, nursing, work
in the factory, or anything that came in her way, being anxious to
educate her little girl. Now, as she sat beside the bed in the small,
poor room, that hope almost died within her, for here was the child
laid up for months, probably, and the one ambition and pleasure of the
solitary woman's life was to see Janey Pecq's name over all the high
marks in the school-reports she proudly brought home.

“She'll win through, please Heaven, and I'll see my lass a gentlewoman
yet, thanks to the good friend in yonder, who will never let her want
for care,” thought the poor soul, looking out into the gloom where a
long ray of light streamed from the great house warm and comfortable
upon the cottage, like the spirit of kindness which made the inmates
friends and neighbors.

Meantime, that other mother sat by her boy's bed as anxious but with
better hope, for Mrs. Minot made trouble sweet and helpful by the way in
which she bore it; and her boys were learning of her how to find silver
linings to the clouds that must come into the bluest skies.

Jack lay wide awake, with hot cheeks, and throbbing head, and all sorts
of queer sensations in the broken leg. The soothing potion he had
taken did not affect him yet, and he tried to beguile the weary time by
wondering who came and went below. Gentle rings at the front door, and
mysterious tappings at the back, had been going on all the evening; for
the report of the accident had grown astonishingly in its travels, and
at eight o'clock the general belief was that Jack had broken both legs,
fractured his skull, and lay at the point of death, while Jill had
dislocated one shoulder, and was bruised black and blue from top to
toe. Such being the case, it is no wonder that anxious playmates and
neighbors haunted the doorsteps of the two houses, and that offers of
help poured in.

Frank, having tied up the bell and put a notice in the lighted
side-window, saying, “Go to the back door,” sat in the parlor, supported
by his chum, Gus, while Ed played softly on the piano, hoping to lull
Jack to sleep. It did soothe him, for a very sweet friendship existed
between the tall youth and the lad of thirteen. Ed went with the
big fellows, but always had a kind word for the smaller boys; and
affectionate Jack, never ashamed to show his love, was often seen with
his arm round Ed's shoulder, as they sat together in the pleasant red
parlors, where all the young people were welcome and Frank was king.

“Is the pain any easier, my darling?” asked Mrs. Minot, leaning over the
pillow, where the golden head lay quiet for a moment.

“Not much. I forget it listening to the music. Dear old Ed is playing
all my favorite tunes, and it is very nice. I guess he feels pretty
sorry about me.”

“They all do. Frank could not talk of it. Gus wouldn't go home to tea,
he was so anxious to do something for us. Joe brought back the bits of
your poor sled, because he didn't like to leave them lying round for any
one to carry off, he said, and you might like them to remember your fall
by.”

Jack tried to laugh, but it was rather a failure, though he managed to
say, cheerfully,--

“That was good of old Joe. I wouldn't lend him 'Thunderbolt' for fear
he'd hurt it. Couldn't have smashed it up better than I did, could he?
Don't think I want any pieces to remind me of _that_ fall. I just wish
you'd seen us, mother! It must have been a splendid spill to look at,
any way.”

“No, thank you; I'd rather not even try to imagine my precious boy going
heels over head down that dreadful hill. No more pranks of that sort for
some time, Jacky;” and Mrs. Minot looked rather pleased on the whole to
have her venturesome bird safe under her maternal wing.

“No coasting till some time in January. What a fool I was to do it!
Go-bangs always are dangerous, and that's the fun of the thing. Oh
dear!”

Jack threw his arms about and frowned darkly, but never said a word of
the wilful little baggage who had led him into mischief; he was too much
of a gentleman to tell on a girl, though it cost him an effort to hold
his tongue, because Mamma's good opinion was very precious to him, and
he longed to explain. She knew all about it, however, for Jill had been
carried into the house reviling herself for the mishap, and even in the
midst of her own anxiety for her boy, Mrs. Minot understood the state of
the case without more words. So she now set his mind at rest by saying,
quietly.

“Foolish fun, as you see, dear. Another time, stand firm and help Jill
to control her headstrong will. When you learn to yield less and she
more, there will be no scrapes like this to try us all.”

“I'll remember, mother. I hate not to be obliging, but I guess it would
have saved us lots of trouble if I'd said No in the beginning. I tried
to, but she _would_ go. Poor Jill! I'll take better care of her next
time. Is she very ill, Mamma?”

“I can tell you better to-morrow. She does not suffer much, and we hope
there is no great harm done.”

“I wish she had a nice place like this to be sick in. It must be very
poky in those little rooms,” said Jack, as his eye roved round the large
chamber where he lay so cosey, warm, and pleasant, with the gay chintz
curtains draping doors and windows, the rosy carpet, comfortable chairs,
and a fire glowing in the grate.

“I shall see that she suffers for nothing, so don't trouble your kind
heart about her to-night, but try to sleep; that's what you need,”
 answered his mother, wetting the bandage on his forehead, and putting a
cool hand on the flushed cheeks.

Jack obediently closed his eyes and listened while the boys sang “The
Sweet By and By,” softening their rough young voices for his sake till
the music was as soft as a lullaby. He lay so still his mother thought
he was off, but presently a tear slipped out and rolled down the red
cheek, wetting her hand as it passed.

“My blessed boy, what is it?” she whispered, with a touch and a tone
that only mothers have.

The blue eyes opened wide, and Jack's own sunshiny smile broke through
the tears that filled them as he said with a sniff,--

“Everybody is so good to me I can't help making a noodle of myself.

“You are not a noodle!” cried Mamma, resenting the epithet. “One of the
sweet things about pain and sorrow is that they show us how well we are
loved, how much kindness there is in the world, and how easily we can
make others happy in the same way when they need help and sympathy.
Don't forget that, little son.”

“Don't see how I can, with you to show me how nice it is. Kiss me
good-night, and then 'I'll be good,' as Jill says.”

Nestling his head upon his mother's arm, Jack lay quiet till, lulled by
the music of his mates, he drowsed away into the dreamless sleep which
is Nurse Nature's healthiest soothing sirup for weary souls and bodies.




Chapter III. Ward No. 1


For some days, nothing was seen and little was heard of the “dear
sufferers,” as the old ladies called them. But they were not forgotten;
the first words uttered when any of the young people met were: “How is
Jack?” “Seen Jill yet?” and all waited with impatience for the moment
when they could be admitted to their favorite mates, more than ever
objects of interest now.

Meantime, the captives spent the first few days in sleep, pain, and
trying to accept the hard fact that school and play were done with for
months perhaps. But young spirits are wonderfully elastic and soon cheer
up, and healthy young bodies heal fast, or easily adapt themselves to
new conditions. So our invalids began to mend on the fourth day, and
to drive their nurses distracted with efforts to amuse them, before the
first week was over.

The most successful attempt originated in Ward No. 1, as Mrs. Minot
called Jack's apartment, and we will give our sympathizing readers some
idea of this place, which became the stage whereon were enacted many
varied and remarkable scenes.

Each of the Minot boys had his own room, and there collected his own
treasures and trophies, arranged to suit his convenience and taste.
Frank's was full of books, maps, machinery, chemical messes, and
geometrical drawings, which adorned the walls like intricate cobwebs.
A big chair, where he read and studied with his heels higher than his
head, a basket of apples for refreshment at all hours of the day or
night, and an immense inkstand, in which several pens were always
apparently bathing their feet, were the principal ornaments of his
scholastic retreat.

Jack's hobby was athletic sports, for he was bent on having a strong and
active body for his happy little soul to live and enjoy itself in. So a
severe simplicity reigned in his apartment; in summer, especially, for
then his floor was bare, his windows were uncurtained, and the chairs
uncushioned, the bed being as narrow and hard as Napoleon's. The only
ornaments were dumbbells, whips, bats, rods, skates, boxing-gloves, a
big bath-pan and a small library, consisting chiefly of books on games,
horses, health, hunting, and travels. In winter his mother made things
more comfortable by introducing rugs, curtains, and a fire. Jack,
also, relented slightly in the severity of his training, occasionally
indulging in the national buckwheat cake, instead of the prescribed
oatmeal porridge, for breakfast, omitting his cold bath when the
thermometer was below zero, and dancing at night, instead of running a
given distance by day.

Now, however, he was a helpless captive, given over to all sorts of
coddling, laziness, and luxury, and there was a droll mixture of mirth
and melancholy in his face, as he lay trussed up in bed, watching the
comforts which had suddenly robbed his room of its Spartan simplicity.
A delicious couch was there, with Frank reposing in its depths, half
hidden under several folios which he was consulting for a history of the
steam-engine, the subject of his next composition.

A white-covered table stood near, with all manner of dainties set forth
in a way to tempt the sternest principles. Vases of flowers bloomed on
the chimney-piece,--gifts from anxious young ladies, left with their
love. Frivolous story-books and picture-papers strewed the bed, now
shrouded in effeminate chintz curtains, beneath which Jack lay like
a wounded warrior in his tent. But the saddest sight for our crippled
athlete was a glimpse, through a half-opened door, at the beloved
dumb-bells, bats, balls, boxing-gloves, and snow-shoes, all piled
ignominiously away in the bath-pan, mournfully recalling the fact that
their day was over, now, at least for some time.

He was about to groan dismally, when his eye fell on a sight which made
him swallow the groan, and cough instead, as if it choked him a little.
The sight was his mother's face, as she sat in a low chair rolling
bandages, with a basket beside her in which were piles of old linen,
lint, plaster, and other matters, needed for the dressing of wounds. As
he looked, Jack remembered how steadily and tenderly she had stood by
him all through the hard times just past, and how carefully she had
bathed and dressed his wound each day in spite of the effort it cost her
to give him pain or even see him suffer.

“That's a better sort of strength than swinging twenty-pound dumb-bells
or running races; I guess I'll try for that kind, too, and not howl or
let her see me squirm when the doctor hurts,” thought the boy, as he saw
that gentle face so pale and tired with much watching and anxiety, yet
so patient, serene, and cheerful, that it was like sunshine.

“Lie down and take a good nap, mother dear, I feel first-rate, and Frank
can see to me if I want anything. Do, now,” he added, with a persuasive
nod toward the couch, and a boyish relish in stirring up his lazy
brother.

After some urging, Mamma consented to go to her room for forty winks,
leaving Jack in the care of Frank, begging him to be as quiet as
possible if the dear boy wished to sleep, and to amuse him if he did
not.

Being worn out, Mrs. Minot lengthened her forty winks into a three
hours' nap, and as the “dear boy” scorned repose, Mr. Frank had his
hands full while on guard.

“I'll read to you. Here's Watt, Arkwright, Fulton, and a lot of capital
fellows, with pictures that will do your heart good. Have a bit, will
you?” asked the new nurse, flapping the leaves invitingly.--for Frank
had a passion for such things, and drew steam-engines all over his
slate, as Tommy Traddles drew hosts of skeletons when low in his
spirits.

“I don't want any of your old boilers and stokers and whirligigs. I'm
tired of reading, and want something regularly jolly,” answered Jack,
who had been chasing white buffaloes with “The Hunters of the West,”
 till he was a trifle tired and fractious.

“Play cribbage, euchre, anything you like;” and Frank obligingly
disinterred himself from under the folios, feeling that it _was_ hard
for a fellow to lie flat a whole week.

“No fun; just two of us. Wish school was over, so the boys would come
in; doctor said I might see them now.”

“They'll be along by and by, and I'll hail them. Till then, what shall
we do? I'm your man for anything, only put a name to it.”

“Just wish I had a telegraph or a telephone, so I could talk to Jill.
Wouldn't it be fun to pipe across and get an answer!”

“I'll make either you say;” and Frank looked as if trifles of that sort
were to be had for the asking.

“Could you, really?”

“We'll start the telegraph first, then you can send things over if you
like,” said Frank, prudently proposing the surest experiment.

“Go ahead, then. I'd like that, and so would Jill, for I know she wants
to hear from me.”

“There's one trouble, though; I shall have to leave you alone for a few
minutes while I rig up the ropes;” and Frank looked sober, for he was a
faithful boy, and did not want to desert his post.

“Oh, never mind; I won't want anything. If I do, I can pound for Ann.”

“And wake mother. I'll fix you a better way than that;” and, full
of inventive genius, our young Edison spliced the poker to part of a
fishing-rod in a jiffy, making a long-handled hook which reached across
the room.

“There's an arm for you; now hook away, and let's see how it works,”
 he said, handing over the instrument to Jack, who proceeded to show its
unexpected capabilities by hooking the cloth off the table in attempting
to get his handkerchief, catching Frank by the hair when fishing for a
book, and breaking a pane of glass in trying to draw down the curtain.

“It's so everlasting long, I can't manage it,” laughed Jack, as it
finally caught in his bed-hangings, and nearly pulled them, ring and
all, down upon his head.

“Let it alone, unless you need something very much, and don't bother
about the glass. It's just what we want for the telegraph wire or
rope to go through. Keep still, and I'll have the thing running in ten
minutes;” and, delighted with the job, Frank hurried away, leaving Jack
to compose a message to send as soon as it was possible.

“What in the world is that flying across the Minots' yard,--a brown hen
or a boy's kite?” exclaimed old Miss Hopkins, peering out of her window
at the singular performances going on in her opposite neighbor's garden.

First, Frank appeared with a hatchet and chopped a clear space in the
hedge between his own house and the cottage; next, a clothes line was
passed through this aperture and fastened somewhere on the other side;
lastly, a small covered basket, slung on this rope, was seen hitching
along, drawn either way by a set of strings; then, as if satisfied with
his job, Frank retired, whistling “Hail Columbia.”

“It's those children at their pranks again. I thought broken bones
wouldn't keep them out of mischief long,” said the old lady, watching
with great interest the mysterious basket travelling up and down the
rope from the big house to the cottage.

If she had seen what came and went over the wires of the “Great
International Telegraph,” she would have laughed till her spectacles
flew off her Roman nose. A letter from Jack, with a large orange, went
first, explaining the new enterprise:--

“Dear Jill,--It's too bad you can't come over to see me. I am pretty
well, but awful tired of keeping still. I want to see you ever so much.
Frank has fixed us a telegraph, so we can write and send things. Won't
it be jolly! I can't look out to see him do it; but, when you pull your
string, my little bell rings, and I know a message is coming. I send you
an orange. Do you like _gorver_ jelly? People send in lots of goodies,
and we will go halves. Good-by.

“Jack”

Away went the basket, and in fifteen minutes it came back from the
cottage with nothing in it but the orange.

“Hullo! Is she mad?” asked Jack, as Frank brought the despatch for him
to examine.

But, at the first touch, the hollow peel opened, and out fell a letter,
two gum-drops, and an owl made of a peanut, with round eyes drawn at the
end where the stem formed a funny beak. Two bits of straw were the legs,
and the face looked so like Dr. Whiting that both boys laughed at the
sight.

“That's so like Jill; she'd make fun if she was half dead. Let's see
what she says;” and Jack read the little note, which showed a sad
neglect of the spelling-book:--

“Dear Jacky,--I can't stir and it's horrid. The telly graf is very nice
and we will have fun with it. I never ate any _gorver_ jelly. The orange
was first rate. Send me a book to read. All about bears and ships
and crockydiles. The doctor was coming to see you, so I sent him the
quickest way. Molly Loo says it is dreadful lonesome at school without
us. Yours truly,

“Jill”

Jack immediately despatched the book and a sample of guava jelly, which
unfortunately upset on the way, to the great detriment of “The Wild
Beasts of Asia and Africa.” Jill promptly responded with the loan of a
tiny black kitten, who emerged spitting and scratching, to Jack's great
delight; and he was cudgelling his brains as to how a fat white rabbit
could be transported, when a shrill whistle from without saved Jill from
that inconvenient offering.

“It's the fellows; do you want to see them?” asked Frank, gazing down
with calm superiority upon the three eager faces which looked up at him.

“Guess I do!” and Jack promptly threw the kitten overboard, scorning to
be seen by any manly eye amusing himself with such girlish toys.

Bang! went the front door; tramp, tramp, tramp, came six booted feet up
the stairs; and, as Frank threw wide the door, three large beings
paused on the threshold to deliver the courteous “Hullo!” which is the
established greeting among boys on all social occasions.

“Come along, old fellows; I'm ever so glad to see you!” cried the
invalid, with such energetic demonstrations of the arms that he looked
as if about to fly or crow, like an excited young cockerel.

“How are you, Major?”

“Does the leg ache much, Jack?”

“Mr. Phipps says you'll have to pay for the new rails.”

With these characteristic greetings, the gentlemen cast away their hats
and sat down, all grinning cheerfully, and all with eyes irresistibly
fixed upon the dainties, which proved too much for the politeness of
ever-hungry boys.

“Help yourselves,” said Jack, with a hospitable wave. “All the dear old
ladies in town have been sending in nice things, and I can't begin to
eat them up. Lend a hand and clear away this lot, or we shall have to
throw them out of the window. Bring on the doughnuts and the tarts and
the shaky stuff in the entry closet, Frank, and let's have a lark.”

No sooner said than done. Gus took the tarts, Joe the doughnuts, Ed the
jelly, and Frank suggested “spoons all round” for the Italian cream. A
few trifles in the way of custard, fruit, and wafer biscuits were not
worth mentioning; but every dish was soon emptied, and Jack said, as he
surveyed the scene of devastation with great satisfaction,--

“Call again to-morrow, gentlemen, and we will have another bout. Free
lunches at 5 P.M. till further notice. Now tell me all the news.”

For half an hour, five tongues went like mill clappers, and there is no
knowing when they would have stopped if the little bell had not suddenly
rung with a violence that made them jump.

“That's Jill; see what she wants, Frank;” and while his brother sent off
the basket, Jack told about the new invention, and invited his mates to
examine and admire.

They did so, and shouted with merriment when the next despatch from Jill
arrived. A pasteboard jumping-jack, with one leg done up in cotton-wool
to preserve the likeness, and a great lump of molasses candy in a brown
paper, with accompanying note:--

“Dear Sir,--I saw the boys go in, and know you are having a nice time,
so I send over the candy Molly Loo and Merry brought me. Mammy says I
can't eat it, and it will all melt away if I keep it. Also a picture of
Jack Minot, who will dance on one leg and waggle the other, and make you
laugh. I wish I could come, too. Don't you hate grewel? I do.--In haste,

“J.P.”

“Let's all send her a letter,” proposed Jack, and out came pens,
ink, paper, and the lamp, and every one fell to scribbling. A droll
collection was the result, for Frank drew a picture of the fatal fall
with broken rails flying in every direction, Jack with his head swollen
to the size of a balloon, and Jill in two pieces, while the various boys
and girls were hit off with a sly skill that gave Gus legs like a stork,
Molly Loo hair several yards long, and Boo a series of visible howls
coming out of an immense mouth in the shape of o's. The oxen were
particularly good, for their horns branched like those of the moose, and
Mr. Grant had a patriarchal beard which waved in the breeze as he bore
the wounded girl to a sled very like a funeral pyre, the stakes being
crowned with big mittens like torches.

“You ought to be an artist. I never saw such a dabster as you are.
That's the very moral of Joe, all in a bunch on the fence, with a blot
to show how purple his nose was,” said Gus, holding up the sketch for
general criticism and admiration.

“I'd rather have a red nose than legs like a grasshopper; so you needn't
twit, Daddy,” growled Joe, quite unconscious that a blot actually did
adorn his nose, as he labored over a brief despatch.

The boys enjoyed the joke, and one after the other read out his message
to the captive lady:--

“Dear Jill,--Sorry you ain't here. Great fun. Jack pretty lively. Laura
and Lot would send love if they knew of the chance. Fly round and get
well.

“Gus”

“Dear Gilliflower,--Hope you are pretty comfortable in your 'dungeon
cell.' Would you like a serenade when the moon comes? Hope you will soon
be up again, for we miss you very much. Shall be very happy to help in
any way I can. Love to your mother. Your true friend,

“E.D.”

“Miss Pecq.

“_Dear Madam_,--I am happy to tell you that we are all well, and hope
you are the same. I gave Jem Cox a licking because he went to your desk.
You had better send for your books. You won't have to pay for the sled
or the fence. Jack says he will see to it. We have been having a spread
over here. First-rate things. I wouldn't mind breaking a leg, if I
had such good grub and no chores to do. No more now, from yours, with
esteem,

“Joseph P. Flint”

Joe thought that an elegant epistle, having copied portions of it from
the “Letter Writer,” and proudly read it off to the boys, who assured
him that Jill would be much impressed.

“Now, Jack, hurry up and let us send the lot off, for we must go,”
 said Gus, as Frank put the letters in the basket, and the clatter of
tea-things was heard below.

“I'm not going to show mine. It's private and you mustn't look,”
 answered Jack, patting down an envelope with such care that no one had a
chance to peep.

But Joe had seen the little note copied, and while the others were at
the window working the telegraph he caught up the original, carelessly
thrust by Jack under the pillow, and read it aloud before any one knew
what he was about.

“My Dear,--I wish I could send you some of my good times. As I can't, I
send you much love, and I hope you will try and be patient as I am going
to, for it was our fault, and we must not make a fuss now. Ain't mothers
sweet? Mine is coming over to-morrow to see you and tell me how you are.
This round thing is a kiss for good-night.

“Your Jack”

“Isn't that spoony? You'd better hide your face, I think. He's getting
to be a regular mollycoddle, isn't he?” jeered Joe, as the boys laughed,
and then grew sober, seeing Jack's head buried in the bedclothes, after
sending a pillow at his tormentor.

It nearly hit Mrs. Minot, coming in with her patient's tea on a tray,
and at sight of her the guests hurriedly took leave, Joe nearly tumbling
downstairs to escape from Frank, who would have followed, if his mother
had not said quickly, “Stay, and tell me what is the matter.”

“Only teasing Jack a bit. Don't be mad, old boy, Joe didn't mean any
harm, and it _was_ rather soft, now wasn't it?” asked Frank, trying to
appease the wounded feelings of his brother.

“I charged you not to worry him. Those boys were too much for the poor
dear, and I ought not to have left him,” said Mamma, as she vainly
endeavored to find and caress the yellow head burrowed so far out of
sight that nothing but one red ear was visible.

“He liked it, and we got on capitally till Joe roughed him about Jill.
Ah, Joe's getting it now! I thought Gus and Ed would do that little
job for me,” added Frank, running to the window as the sound of stifled
cries and laughter reached him.

The red ear heard also, and Jack popped up his head to ask, with
interest,--

“What are they doing to him?”

“Rolling him in the snow, and he's howling like fun.”

“Serves him right,” muttered Jack, with a frown. Then, as a wail arose
suggestive of an unpleasant mixture of snow in the mouth and thumps on
the back, he burst out laughing, and said, good-naturedly, “Go and stop
them, Frank; I won't mind, only tell him it was a mean trick. Hurry! Gus
is so strong he doesn't know how his pounding hurts.”

Off ran Frank, and Jack told his wrongs to his mother. She sympathized
heartily, and saw no harm in the affectionate little note, which would
please Jill, and help her to bear her trials patiently.

“It isn't silly to be fond of her, is it? She is so nice and funny, and
tries to be good, and likes me, and I won't be ashamed of my friends, if
folks do laugh,” protested Jack, with a rap of his teaspoon.

“No, dear, it is quite kind and proper, and I'd rather have you play
with a merry little girl than with rough boys till you are big enough
to hold your own,” answered Mamma, putting the cup to his lips that the
reclining lad might take his broma without spilling.

“Pooh! I don't mean that; I'm strong enough now to take care of myself,”
 cried Jack, stoutly. “I can thrash Joe any day, if I like. Just look
at my arm; there's muscle for you!” and up went a sleeve, to the great
danger of overturning the tray, as the boy proudly displayed his biceps
and expanded his chest, both of which were very fine for a lad of his
years. “If I'd been on my legs, he wouldn't have dared to insult me, and
it was cowardly to hit a fellow when he was down.”

Mrs. Minot wanted to laugh at Jack's indignation, but the bell rang, and
she had to go and pull in the basket, much amused at the new game.

Burning to distinguish herself in the eyes of the big boys, Jill had
sent over a tall, red flannel night-cap, which she had been making for
some proposed Christmas plays, and added the following verse, for she
was considered a gifted rhymester at the game parties:--

  “When it comes night,
  We put out the light.
  Some blow with a puff,
  Some turn down and snuff;
  But neat folks prefer
  A nice extinguis_her_.
  So here I send you back
  One to put on Mr. Jack.”

“Now, I call that regularly smart; not one of us could do it, and I just
wish Joe was here to see it. I want to send once more, something good
for tea; she hates gruel so;” and the last despatch which the Great
International Telegraph carried that day was a baked apple and a warm
muffin, with “J. M.'s best regards.”




Chapter IV. Ward No. 2.


Things were not so gay in Ward No. 2, for Mrs. Pecq was very busy, and
Jill had nothing to amuse her but flying visits from the girls, and such
little plays as she could invent for herself in bed. Fortunately, she
had a lively fancy, and so got on pretty well, till keeping still grew
unbearable, and the active child ached in every limb to be up and out.
That, however, was impossible, for the least attempt to sit or stand
brought on the pain that took her breath away and made her glad to lie
flat again. The doctor spoke cheerfully, but looked sober, and Mrs. Pecq
began to fear that Janey was to be a cripple for life. She said nothing,
but Jill's quick eyes saw an added trouble in the always anxious face,
and it depressed her spirits, though she never guessed half the mischief
the fall had done.

The telegraph was a great comfort, and the two invalids kept up a lively
correspondence, not to say traffic in light articles, for the Great
International was the only aerial express in existence. But even this
amusement flagged after a time; neither had much to tell, and when the
daily health bulletins had been exchanged, messages gave out, and the
basket's travels grew more and more infrequent. Neither could read all
the time, games were soon used up, their mates were at school most of
the day, and after a week or two the poor children began to get pale and
fractious with the confinement, always so irksome to young people.

“I do believe the child will fret herself into a fever, mem, and I'm
clean distraught to know what to do for her. She never used to mind
trifles, but now she frets about the oddest things, and I can't change
them. This wall-paper is well enough, but she has taken a fancy that the
spots on it look like spiders, and it makes her nervous. I've no other
warm place to put her, and no money for a new paper. Poor lass! There
are hard times before her, I'm fearing.”

Mrs. Pecq said this in a low voice to Mrs. Minot, who came in as often
as she could, to see what her neighbor needed; for both mothers were
anxious, and sympathy drew them to one another. While one woman talked,
the other looked about the little room, not wondering in the least that
Jill found it hard to be contented there. It was very neat, but so plain
that there was not even a picture on the walls, nor an ornament upon the
mantel, except the necessary clock, lamp, and match-box. The paper _was_
ugly, being a deep buff with a brown figure that did look very like
spiders sprawling over it, and might well make one nervous to look at
day after day.

Jill was asleep in the folding chair Dr. Whiting had sent, with a
mattress to make it soft. The back could be raised or lowered at will;
but only a few inches had been gained as yet, and the thin hair pillow
was all she could bear. She looked very pretty as she lay, with dark
lashes against the feverish cheeks, lips apart, and a cloud of curly
black locks all about the face pillowed on one arm. She seemed like a
brilliant little flower in that dull place,--for the French blood in her
veins gave her a color, warmth, and grace which were very charming. Her
natural love of beauty showed itself in many ways: a red ribbon had
tied up her hair, a gay but faded shawl was thrown over the bed, and the
gifts sent her were arranged with care upon the table by her side among
her own few toys and treasures. There was something pathetic in this
childish attempt to beautify the poor place, and Mrs. Minot's eyes were
full as she looked at the tired woman, whose one joy and comfort lay
there in such sad plight.

“My dear soul, cheer up, and we will help one another through the hard
times,” she said, with a soft hand on the rough one, and a look that
promised much.

“Please God, we will, mem! With such good friends, I never should
complain. I try not to do it, but it breaks my heart to see my little
lass spoiled for life, most like;” and Mrs. Pecq pressed the kind hand
with a despondent sigh.

“We won't say, or even think, that, yet. Everything is possible to youth
and health like Janey's. We must keep her happy, and time will do the
rest, I'm sure. Let us begin at once, and have a surprise for her when
she wakes.”

As she spoke, Mrs. Minot moved quietly about the room, pinning the pages
of several illustrated papers against the wall at the foot of the bed,
and placing to the best advantage the other comforts she had brought.

“Keep up your heart, neighbor. I have an idea in my head which I think
will help us all, if I can carry it out,” she said, cheerily, as she
went, leaving Mrs. Pecq to sew on Jack's new night-gowns, with swift
fingers, and the grateful wish that she might work for these good
friends forever.

As if the whispering and rustling had disturbed her, Jill soon began to
stir, and slowly opened the eyes which had closed so wearily on the
dull December afternoon. The bare wall with its brown spiders no longer
confronted her, but the colored print of a little girl dancing to the
tune her father was playing on a guitar, while a stately lady, with
satin dress, ruff, and powder, stood looking on, well pleased. The
quaint figure, in its belaced frock, quilted petticoat, and red-heeled
shoes, seemed to come tripping toward her in such a life-like way,
that she almost saw the curls blow back, heard the rustle of the rich
brocade, and caught the sparkle of the little maid's bright eyes.

“Oh, how pretty! Who sent them?” asked Jill, eagerly, as her eye glanced
along the wall, seeing other new and interesting things beyond: an
elephant-hunt, a ship in full sail, a horse-race, and a ball-room.

“The good fairy who never comes empty-handed. Look round a bit and you
will see more pretties all for you, my dearie;” and her mother pointed
to a bunch of purple grapes in a green leaf plate, a knot of bright
flowers pinned on the white curtain, and a gay little double gown across
the foot of the bed.

Jill clapped her hands, and was enjoying her new pleasures, when in came
Merry and Molly Loo, with Boo, of course, trotting after her like a fat
and amiable puppy. Then the good times began; the gown was put on, the
fruit tasted, and the pictures were studied like famous works of art.

“It's a splendid plan to cover up that hateful wall. I'd stick pictures
all round and have a gallery. That reminds me! Up in the garret at our
house is a box full of old fashion-books my aunt left. I often look at
them on rainy days, and they are very funny. I'll go this minute and
get every one. We can pin them up, or make paper dolls;” and away rushed
Molly Loo, with the small brother waddling behind, for, when he lost
sight of her, he was desolate indeed.

The girls had fits of laughter over the queer costumes of years gone
by, and put up a splendid procession of ladies in full skirts, towering
hats, pointed slippers, powdered hair, simpering faces, and impossible
waists.

“I do think this bride is perfectly splendid, the long train and veil
are _so_ sweet,” said Jill, revelling in fine clothes as she turned from
one plate to another.

“I like the elephants best, and I'd give anything to go on a hunt like
that!” cried Molly Loo, who rode cows, drove any horse she could get,
had nine cats, and was not afraid of the biggest dog that ever barked.

“I fancy 'The Dancing Lesson;' it is so sort of splendid, with the great
windows, gold chairs, and fine folks. Oh, I would like to live in
a castle with a father and mother like that,” said Merry, who was
romantic, and found the old farmhouse on the hill a sad trial to her
high-flown ideas of elegance.

“Now, that ship, setting out for some far-away place, is more to my
mind. I weary for home now and then, and mean to see it again some
day;” and Mrs. Pecq looked longingly at the English ship, though it was
evidently outward bound. Then, as if reproaching herself for discontent,
she added: “It looks like those I used to see going off to India with a
load of missionaries. I came near going myself once, with a lady bound
for Siam; but I went to Canada with her sister, and here I am.”

“I'd like to be a missionary and go where folks throw their babies to
the crocodiles. I'd watch and fish them out, and have a school, and
bring them up, and convert all the people till they knew better,” said
warm-hearted Molly Loo, who befriended every abused animal and forlorn
child she met.

“We needn't go to Africa to be missionaries; they have 'em nearer home
and need 'em, too. In all the big cities there are a many, and they have
their hands full with the poor, the wicked, and the helpless. One can
find that sort of work anywhere, if one has a mind,” said Mrs. Pecq.

“I wish we had some to do here. I'd so like to go round with baskets
of tea and rice, and give out tracts and talk to people. Wouldn't you,
girls?” asked Molly, much taken with the new idea.

“It would be rather nice to have a society all to ourselves, and have
meetings and resolutions and things,” answered Merry, who was fond of
little ceremonies, and always went to the sewing circle with her mother.

“We wouldn't let the boys come in. We'd have it a secret society, as
they do their temperance lodge, and we'd have badges and pass-words
and grips. It would be fun if we can only get some heathen to work at!”
 cried Jill, ready for fresh enterprises of every sort.

“I can tell you someone to begin on right away,” said her mother,
nodding at her. “As wild a little savage as I'd wish to see. Take her
in hand, and make a pretty-mannered lady of her. Begin at home, my lass,
and you'll find missionary work enough for a while.”

“Now, Mammy, you mean me! Well, I will begin; and I'll be so good, folks
won't know me. Being sick makes naughty children behave in story-books,
I'll see if live ones can't;” and Jill put on such a sanctified face
that the girls laughed and asked for their missions also, thinking they
would be the same.

“You, Merry, might do a deal at home helping mother, and setting the big
brothers a good example. One little girl in a house can do pretty much
as she will, especially if she has a mind to make plain things nice and
comfortable, and not long for castles before she knows how to do her own
tasks well,” was the first unexpected reply.

Merry colored, but took the reproof sweetly, resolving to do what she
could, and surprised to find how many ways seemed open to her after a
few minutes' thought.

“Where shall I begin? I'm not afraid of a dozen crocodiles after Miss
Bat;” and Molly Loo looked about her with a fierce air, having had
practice in battles with the old lady who kept her father's house.

“Well, dear, you haven't far to look for as nice a little heathen as
you'd wish;” and Mrs. Pecq glanced at Boo, who sat on the floor staring
hard at them, attracted by the dread word “crocodile.” He had a cold and
no handkerchief, his little hands were red with chilblains, his clothes
shabby, he had untidy darns in the knees of his stockings, and a head of
tight curls that evidently had not been combed for some time.

“Yes, I know he is, and I try to keep him decent, but I forget, and he
hates to be fixed, and Miss Bat doesn't care, and father laughs when I
talk about it.”

Poor Molly Loo looked much ashamed as she made excuses, trying at the
same time to mend matters by seizing Boo and dusting him all over with
her handkerchief, giving a pull at his hair as if ringing bells, and
then dumping him down again with the despairing exclamation: “Yes, we're
a pair of heathens, and there's no one to save us if I don't.”

That was true enough; for Molly's father was a busy man, careless of
everything but his mills, Miss Bat was old and lazy, and felt as if
she might take life easy after serving the motherless children for many
years as well as she knew how. Molly was beginning to see how much amiss
things were at home, and old enough to feel mortified, though, as yet,
she had done nothing to mend the matter except be kind to the little
boy.

“You will, my dear,” answered Mrs. Pecq, encouragingly, for she knew all
about it. “Now you've each got a mission, let us see how well you will
get on. Keep it secret, if you like, and report once a week. I'll be a
member, and we'll do great things yet.”

“We won't begin till after Christmas; there is so much to do, we never
shall have time for any more. Don't tell, and we'll start fair at New
Year's, if not before,” said Jill, taking the lead as usual. Then they
went on with the gay ladies, who certainly were heathen enough in dress
to be in sad need of conversion,--to common-sense at least.

“I feel as if I was at a party,” said Jill, after a pause occupied
in surveying her gallery with great satisfaction, for dress was her
delight, and here she had every conceivable style and color.

“Talking of parties, isn't it too bad that we must give up our Christmas
fun? Can't get on without you and Jack, so we are not going to do a
thing, but just have our presents,” said Merry, sadly, as they began to
fit different heads and bodies together, to try droll effects.

“I shall be all well in a fortnight, I know; but Jack won't, for it will
take more than a month to mend his poor leg. May be they will have a
dance in the boys' big room, and he can look on,” suggested Jill, with
a glance at the dancing damsel on the wall, for she dearly loved it, and
never guessed how long it would be before her light feet would keep time
to music again.

“You'd better give Jack a hint about the party. Send over some smart
ladies, and say they have come to his Christmas ball,” proposed
audacious Molly Loo, always ready for fun.

So they put a preposterous green bonnet, top-heavy with plumes, on a
little lady in yellow, who sat in a carriage; the lady beside her, in
winter costume of velvet pelisse and ermine boa, was fitted to a bride's
head with its orange flowers and veil, and these works of art were sent
over to Jack, labelled “Miss Laura and Lotty Burton going to the Minots'
Christmas ball,”--a piece of naughtiness on Jill's part, for she knew
Jack liked the pretty sisters, whose gentle manners made her own wild
ways seem all the more blamable.

No answer came for a long time, and the girls had almost forgotten their
joke in a game of Letters, when “Tingle, tangle!” went the bell, and the
basket came in heavily laden. A roll of colored papers was tied outside,
and within was a box that rattled, a green and silver horn, a roll of
narrow ribbons, a spool of strong thread, some large needles, and a note
from Mrs. Minot:--

“Dear Jill,--I think of having a Christmas tree so that our invalids can
enjoy it, and all your elegant friends are cordially invited. Knowing
that you would like to help, I send some paper for sugar-plum horns and
some beads for necklaces. They will brighten the tree and please
the girls for themselves or their dolls. Jack sends you a horn for a
pattern, and will you make a ladder-necklace to show him how? Let me
know if you need anything.

“Yours in haste,

“Anna Minot”

“She knew what the child would like, bless her kind heart,” said Mrs.
Pecq to herself, and something brighter than the most silvery bead shone
on Jack's shirt-sleeve, as she saw the rapture of Jill over the new work
and the promised pleasure.

Joyful cries greeted the opening of the box, for bunches of splendid
large bugles appeared in all colors, and a lively discussion went on as
to the best contrasts. Jill could not refuse to let her friends share
the pretty work, and soon three necklaces glittered on three necks, as
each admired her own choice.

“I'd be willing to hurt my back dreadfully, if I could lie and do such
lovely things all day,” said Merry, as she reluctantly put down her
needle at last, for home duties waited to be done, and looked more than
ever distasteful after this new pleasure.

“So would I! Oh, do you think Mrs. Minot will let you fill the horns
when they are done? I'd love to help you then. Be sure you send for
me!” cried Molly Loo, arching her neck like a proud pigeon to watch the
glitter of her purple and gold necklace on her brown gown.

“I'm afraid you couldn't be trusted, you love sweeties so, and I'm sure
Boo couldn't. But I'll see about it,” replied Jill, with a responsible
air.

The mention of the boy recalled him to their minds, and looking round
they found him peacefully absorbed in polishing up the floor with
Molly's pocket-handkerchief and oil from the little machine-can. Being
torn from this congenial labor, he was carried off shining with grease
and roaring lustily.

But Jill did not mind her loneliness now, and sang like a happy canary
while she threaded her sparkling beads, or hung the gay horns to dry,
ready for their cargoes of sweets. So Mrs. Minot's recipe for sunshine
proved successful, and mother-wit made the wintry day a bright and happy
one for both the little prisoners.




Chapter V. Secrets


There were a great many clubs in Harmony Village, but as we intend to
interest ourselves with the affairs of the young folks only, we need
not dwell upon the intellectual amusements of the elders. In summer, the
boys devoted themselves to baseball, the girls to boating, and all got
rosy, stout, and strong, in these healthful exercises. In winter,
the lads had their debating club, the lasses a dramatic ditto. At
the former, astonishing bursts of oratory were heard; at the latter,
everything was boldly attempted, from Romeo and Juliet to Mother Goose's
immortal melodies. The two clubs frequently met and mingled their
attractions in a really entertaining manner, for the speakers made good
actors, and the young actresses were most appreciative listeners to the
eloquence of each budding Demosthenes.

Great plans had been afoot for Christmas or New Year, but when the grand
catastrophe put an end to the career of one of the best “spouters,” and
caused the retirement of the favorite “singing chambermaid,” the affair
was postponed till February, when Washington's birthday was always
celebrated by the patriotic town, where the father of his country once
put on his nightcap, or took off his boots, as that ubiquitous hero
appears to have done in every part of the United States.

Meantime the boys were studying Revolutionary characters, and the girls
rehearsing such dramatic scenes as they thought most appropriate and
effective for the 22d. In both of these attempts they were much helped
by the sense and spirit of Ralph Evans, a youth of nineteen, who was
a great favorite with the young folks, not only because he was a good,
industrious fellow, who supported his grandmother, but also full of
talent, fun, and ingenuity. It was no wonder every one who really knew
him liked him, for he could turn his hand to anything, and loved to do
it. If the girls were in despair about a fire-place when acting “The
Cricket on the Hearth,” he painted one, and put a gas-log in it that
made the kettle really boil, to their great delight. If the boys found
the interest of their club flagging, Ralph would convulse them by
imitations of the “Member from Cranberry Centre,” or fire them with
speeches of famous statesmen. Charity fairs could not get on without
him, and in the store where he worked he did many an ingenious job,
which made him valued for his mechanical skill, as well as for his
energy and integrity.

Mrs. Minot liked to have him with her sons, because they also were to
paddle their own canoes by and by, and she believed that, rich or poor,
boys make better men for learning to use the talents they possess, not
merely as ornaments, but tools with which to carve their own fortunes;
and the best help toward this end is an example of faithful work, high
aims, and honest living. So Ralph came often, and in times of trouble
was a real rainy-day friend. Jack grew very fond of him during
his imprisonment, for the good youth ran in every evening to get
commissions, amuse the boy with droll accounts of the day's adventures,
or invent lifts, bed-tables, and foot-rests for the impatient invalid.
Frank found him a sure guide through the mechanical mysteries which he
loved, and spent many a useful half-hour discussing cylinders, pistons,
valves, and balance-wheels. Jill also came in for her share of care and
comfort; the poor little back lay all the easier for the air-cushion
Ralph got her, and the weary headaches found relief from the spray
atomizer, which softly distilled its scented dew on the hot forehead
till she fell asleep.

Round the beds of Jack and Jill met and mingled the schoolmates of whom
our story treats. Never, probably, did invalids have gayer times than
our two, after a week of solitary confinement; for school gossip crept
in, games could not be prevented, and Christmas secrets were concocted
in those rooms till they were regular conspirators' dens, when they were
not little Bedlams.

After the horn and bead labors were over, the stringing of pop-corn on
red, and cranberries on white, threads, came next, and Jack and Jill
often looked like a new kind of spider in the pretty webs hung about
them, till reeled off to bide their time in the Christmas closet. Paper
flowers followed, and gay garlands and bouquets blossomed, regardless of
the snow and frost without. Then there was a great scribbling of names,
verses, and notes to accompany the steadily increasing store of odd
parcels which were collected at the Minots', for gifts from every one
were to ornament the tree, and contributions poured in as the day drew
near.

But the secret which most excited the young people was the deep mystery
of certain proceedings at the Minot house. No one but Frank, Ralph,
and Mamma knew what it was, and the two boys nearly drove the others
distracted by the tantalizing way in which they hinted at joys to come,
talked strangely about birds, went measuring round with foot-rules, and
shut themselves up in the Boys' Den, as a certain large room was called.
This seemed to be the centre of operations, but beyond the fact of
the promised tree no ray of light was permitted to pass the jealously
guarded doors. Strange men with paste-pots and ladders went in,
furniture was dragged about, and all sorts of boyish lumber was sent
up garret and down cellar. Mrs. Minot was seen pondering over heaps
of green stuff, hammering was heard, singular bundles were smuggled
upstairs, flowering plants betrayed their presence by whiffs of
fragrance when the door was opened, and Mrs. Pecq was caught smiling all
by herself in a back bedroom, which usually was shut up in winter.

“They are going to have a play, after all, and that green stuff was the
curtain,” said Molly Loo, as the girls talked it over one day, when they
sat with their backs turned to one another, putting last stitches in
certain bits of work which had to be concealed from all eyes, though
it was found convenient to ask one another's taste as to the color,
materials, and sizes of these mysterious articles.

“I think it is going to be a dance. I heard the boys doing their steps
when I went in last evening to find out whether Jack liked blue or
yellow best, so I could put the bow on his pen-wiper,” declared Merry,
knitting briskly away at the last of the pair of pretty white bed-socks
she was making for Jill right under her inquisitive little nose.

“They wouldn't have a party of that kind without Jack and me. It is only
an extra nice tree, you see if it isn't,” answered Jill from behind the
pillows which made a temporary screen to hide the toilet mats she was
preparing for all her friends.

“Every one of you is wrong, and you'd better rest easy, for you won't
find out the best part of it, try as you may.” And Mrs. Pecq actually
chuckled as she, too, worked away at some bits of muslin, with her back
turned to the very unsocial-looking group.

“Well, I don't care, we've got a secret all our own, and won't ever
tell, will we?” cried Jill, falling back on the Home Missionary Society,
though it was not yet begun.

“Never!” answered the girls, and all took great comfort in the idea that
one mystery would not be cleared up, even at Christmas.

Jack gave up guessing, in despair, after he had suggested a new
dining-room where he could eat with the family, a private school
in which his lessons might go on with a tutor, or a theatre for the
production of the farces in which he delighted.

“It is going to be used to keep something in that you are very fond of,”
 said Mamma, taking pity on him at last.

“Ducks?” asked Jack, with a half pleased, half puzzled air, not quite
seeing where the water was to come from.

Frank exploded at the idea, and added to the mystification by saying,--

“There will be one little duck and one great donkey in it.” Then,
fearing he had told the secret, he ran off, quacking and braying
derisively.

“It is to be used for creatures that I, too, am fond of, and you know
neither donkeys nor ducks are favorites of mine,” said Mamma, with a
demure expression, as she sat turning over old clothes for the bundles
that always went to poor neighbors, with a little store of goodies, at
this time of the year.

“I know! I know! It is to be a new ward for more sick folks, isn't it,
now?” cried Jack, with what he thought a great proof of shrewdness.

“I don't see how I could attend to many more patients till this one is
off my hands,” answered Mamma, with a queer smile, adding quickly, as if
she too was afraid of letting the cat out of the bag: “That reminds me
of a Christmas I once spent among the hospitals and poor-houses of
a great city with a good lady who, for thirty years, had made it her
mission to see that these poor little souls had one merry day. We gave
away two hundred dolls, several great boxes of candy and toys, besides
gay pictures, and new clothes to orphan children, sick babies, and
half-grown innocents. Ah, my boy, that was a day to remember all my
life, to make me doubly grateful for my blessings, and very glad to
serve the helpless and afflicted, as that dear woman did.”

The look and tone with which the last words were uttered effectually
turned Jack's thoughts from the great secret, and started another small
one, for he fell to planning what he would buy with his pocket-money to
surprise the little Pats and Biddies who were to have no Christmas tree.




Chapter VI. Surprises


“Is it pleasant?” was the question Jill asked before she was fairly
awake on Christmas morning.

“Yes, dear; as bright as heart could wish. Now eat a bit, and then I'll
make you nice for the day's pleasure. I only hope it won't be too much
for you,” answered Mrs. Pecq, bustling about, happy, yet anxious,
for Jill was to be carried over to Mrs. Minot's, and it was her first
attempt at going out since the accident.

It seemed as if nine o'clock would never come, and Jill, with wraps all
ready, lay waiting in a fever of impatience for the doctor's visit,
as he wished to superintend the moving. At last he came, found all
promising, and having bundled up his small patient, carried her, with
Frank's help, in her chair-bed to the ox-sled, which was drawn to the
next door, and Miss Jill landed in the Boys' Den before she had time to
get either cold or tired. Mrs. Minot took her things off with a cordial
welcome, but Jill never said a word, for, after one exclamation, she lay
staring about her, dumb with surprise and delight at what she saw.

The great room was entirely changed; for now it looked like a garden, or
one of the fairy scenes children love, where in-doors and out-of-doors
are pleasantly combined. The ceiling was pale blue, like the sky; the
walls were covered with a paper like a rustic trellis, up which climbed
morning-glories so naturally that the many-colored bells seemed dancing
in the wind. Birds and butterflies flew among them, and here and there,
through arches in the trellis, one seemed to look into a sunny summer
world, contrasting curiously with the wintry landscape lying beyond the
real windows, festooned with evergreen garlands, and curtained only by
stands of living flowers. A green drugget covered the floor like grass,
rustic chairs from the garden stood about, and in the middle of the room
a handsome hemlock waited for its pretty burden. A Yule-log blazed on
the wide hearth, and over the chimney-piece, framed in holly, shone the
words that set all hearts to dancing, “Merry Christmas!”

“Do you like it, dear? This is our surprise for you and Jack, and here
we mean to have good times together,” said Mrs. Minot, who had stood
quietly enjoying the effect of her work.

“Oh, it is so lovely I don't know what to say!” and Jill put up both
arms, as words failed her, and grateful kisses were all she had to
offer.

“Can you suggest anything more to add to the pleasantness?” asked the
gentle lady, holding the small hands in her own, and feeling well repaid
by the child's delight.

“Only Jack;” and Jill's laugh was good to hear, as she glanced up with
merry, yet wistful eyes.

“You are right. We'll have him in at once, or he will come hopping on
one leg;” and away hurried his mother, laughing, too, for whistles,
shouts, thumps, and violent demonstrations of all kinds had been heard
from the room where Jack was raging with impatience, while he waited for
his share of the surprise.

Jill could hardly lie still when she heard the roll of another chair-bed
coming down the hall, its passage enlivened with cries of “Starboard!
Port! Easy now! Pull away!” from Ralph and Frank, as they steered the
recumbent Columbus on his first voyage of discovery.

“Well, I call that handsome!” was Jack's exclamation, when the full
beauty of the scene burst upon his view. Then he forgot all about it and
gave a whoop of pleasure, for there beside the fire was an eager face,
two hands beckoning, and Jill's voice crying, joyfully,--

“I'm here! I'm here! Oh, do come, quick!” Down the long room rattled the
chair, Jack cheering all the way, and brought up beside the other one,
as the long-parted friends exclaimed, with one accord,--

“Isn't this jolly!”

It certainly did look so, for Ralph and Frank danced a wild sort of
fandango round the tree, Dr. Whiting stood and laughed, while the two
mothers beamed from the door-way, and the children, not knowing whether
to laugh or to cry, compromised the matter by clapping their hands and
shouting, “Merry Christmas to everybody!” like a pair of little maniacs.

Then they all sobered down, and the busy ones went off to the various
duties of the day, leaving the young invalids to repose and enjoy
themselves together.

“How nice you look,” said Jill, when they had duly admired the pretty
room.

“So do you,” gallantly returned Jack, as he surveyed her with unusual
interest.

They did look very nice, though happiness was the principal beautifier.
Jill wore a red wrapper, with the most brilliant of all the necklaces
sparkling at her throat, over a nicely crimped frill her mother had made
in honor of the day. All the curly black hair was gathered into a red
net, and a pair of smart little moccasins covered the feet that had not
stepped for many a weary day. Jack was not so gay, but had made himself
as fine as circumstances would permit. A gray dressing-gown, with blue
cuffs and collar, was very becoming to the blonde youth; an immaculate
shirt, best studs, sleeve-buttons, blue tie, and handkerchief wet with
cologne sticking out of the breast-pocket, gave an air of elegance in
spite of the afghan spread over the lower portions of his manly form.
The yellow hair was brushed till it shone, and being parted in the
middle, to hide the black patch, made two engaging little “quirls” on
his forehead. The summer tan had faded from his cheeks, but his eyes
were as blue as the wintry sky, and nearly every white tooth was visible
as he smiled on his partner in misfortune, saying cheerily,--

“I'm ever so glad to see you again; guess we are over the worst of
it now, and can have good times. Won't it be fun to stay here all the
while, and amuse one another?”

“Yes, indeed; but one day is so short! It will be stupider than ever
when I go home to-night,” answered Jill, looking about her with longing
eyes.

“But you are not going home to-night; you are to stay ever so long.
Didn't Mamma tell you?”

“No. Oh, how splendid! Am I really? Where will I sleep? What will Mammy
do without me?” and Jill almost sat up, she was so delighted with the
new surprise.

“That room in there is all fixed for you. I made Frank tell me so much.
Mamma said I might tell you, but I didn't think she would be able to
hold in if she saw you first. Your mother is coming, too, and we are all
going to have larks together till we are well.”

The splendor of this arrangement took Jill's breath away, and before
she got it again, in came Frank and Ralph with two clothes-baskets of
treasures to be hung upon the tree. While they wired on the candles the
children asked questions, and found out all they wanted to know about
the new plans and pleasures.

“Who fixed all this?”

“Mamma thought of it, and Ralph and I did it. He's the man for this sort
of thing, you know. He proposed cutting out the arches and sticking on
birds and butterflies just where they looked best. I put those canaries
over there, they looked so well against the blue;” and Frank proudly
pointed out some queer orange-colored fowls, looking as if they were
having fits in the air, but very effective, nevertheless.

“Your mother said you might call this the Bird Room. We caught a
scarlet-tanager for you to begin with, didn't we, Jack?” and Ralph threw
a _bon-bon_ at Jill, who looked very like a bright little bird in a warm
nest.

“Good for you! Yes, and we are going to keep her in this pretty cage
till we can both fly off together. I say, Jill, where shall we be in our
classes when we do get back?” and Jack's merry face fell at the thought.

“At the foot, if we don't study and keep up. Doctor said I might study
sometimes, if I'd lie still as long as he thought best, and Molly
brought home my books, and Merry says she will come in every day and
tell me where the lessons are. I don't mean to fall behind, if my
backbone is cracked,” said Jill, with a decided nod that made several
black rings fly out of the net to dance on her forehead.

“Frank said he'd pull me along in my Latin, but I've been lazy and
haven't done a thing. Let's go at it and start fair for New Year,”
 proposed Jack, who did not love study as the bright girl did, but was
ashamed to fall behind her in anything.

“All right. They've been reviewing, so we can keep up when they begin,
if we work next week, while the rest have a holiday. Oh, dear, I do miss
school dreadfully;” and Jill sighed for the old desk, every blot and
notch of which was dear to her.

“There come our things, and pretty nice they look, too,” said Jack; and
his mother began to dress the tree, hanging up the gay horns, the gilded
nuts, red and yellow apples and oranges, and festooning long strings
of pop-corn and scarlet cranberries from bough to bough, with the
glittering necklaces hung where the light would show their colors best.

“I never saw such a splendid tree before. I'm glad we could help, though
we were ill. Is it all done now?” asked Jill, when the last parcel was
tied on and everybody stood back to admire the pretty sight.

“One thing more. Hand me that box, Frank, and be very careful that you
fasten this up firmly, Ralph,” answered Mrs. Minot, as she took from its
wrappings the waxen figure of a little child. The rosy limbs were very
life-like, so was the smiling face under the locks of shining hair. Both
plump arms were outspread as if to scatter blessings over all, and downy
wings seemed to flutter from the dimpled shoulders, making an angel of
the baby.

“Is it St. Nicholas?” asked Jill, who had never seen that famous
personage, and knew but little of Christmas festivities.

“It is the Christ-child, whose birthday we are celebrating. I got the
best I could find, for I like the idea better than old Santa Claus;
though we _may_ have him, too,” said Mamma, holding the little image so
that both could see it well.

“It looks like a real baby;” and Jack touched the rosy foot with the tip
of his finger, as if expecting a crow from the half-open lips.

“It reminds me of the saints in the chapel of the Sacred Heart in
Montreal. One little St. John looked like this, only he had a lamb
instead of wings,” said Jill, stroking the flaxen hair, and wishing she
dared ask for it to play with.

“He is the children's saint to pray to, love, and imitate, for he never
forgot them, but blessed and healed and taught them all his life. This
is only a poor image of the holiest baby ever born, but I hope it will
keep his memory in your minds all day, because this is the day for good
resolutions, happy thoughts, and humble prayers, as well as play and
gifts and feasting.”

While she spoke, Mrs. Minot, touching the little figure as tenderly as
if it were alive, had tied a broad white ribbon round it, and, handing
it to Ralph, bade him fasten it to the hook above the tree-top, where it
seemed to float as if the downy wings supported it.

Jack and Jill lay silently watching, with a sweet sort of soberness in
their young faces, and for a moment the room was very still as all eyes
looked up at the Blessed Child. The sunshine seemed to grow more
golden as it flickered on the little head, the flames glanced about
the glittering tree as if trying to climb and kiss the baby feet, and,
without, a chime of bells rang sweetly, calling people to hear again the
lovely story of the life begun on Christmas Day.

Only a minute, but it did them good, and presently, when the pleasant
work was over, and the workers gone, the boys to church, and Mamma to
see about lunch for the invalids, Jack said, gravely, to Jill,--

“I think we ought to be extra good, every one is so kind to us, and we
are getting well, and going to have such capital times. Don't see how we
can do anything else to show we are grateful.”

“It isn't easy to be good when one is sick,” said Jill, thoughtfully.
“I fret dreadfully, I get so tired of being still. I want to scream
sometimes, but I don't, because it would scare Mammy, so I cry. Do you
cry, Jack?”

“Men never do. I want to tramp round when things bother me; but I can't,
so I kick and say, 'Hang it!' and when I get very bad I pitch into
Frank, and he lets me. I tell you, Jill, he's a good brother!” and Jack
privately resolved then and there to invite Frank to take it out of him
in any form he pleased as soon as health would permit.

“I rather think we _shall_ grow good in this pretty place, for I don't
see how we can be bad if we want to, it is all so nice and sort of pious
here,” said Jill, with her eyes on the angel over the tree.

“A fellow can be awfully hungry, I know that. I didn't half eat
breakfast, I was in such a hurry to see you, and know all about the
secrets. Frank kept saying I couldn't guess, that you had come, and I
never would be ready, till finally I got mad and fired an egg at him,
and made no end of a mess.”

Jack and Jill went off into a gale of laughter at the idea of dignified
Frank dodging the egg that smashed on the wall, leaving an indelible
mark of Jack's besetting sin, impatience.

Just then Mrs. Minot came in, well pleased to hear such pleasant sounds,
and to see two merry faces, where usually one listless one met her
anxious eyes.

“The new medicine works well, neighbor,” she said to Mrs. Pecq, who
followed with the lunch tray.

“Indeed it does, mem. I feel as if I'd taken a sup myself, I'm that easy
in my mind.”

And she looked so, too, for she seemed to have left all her cares in the
little house when she locked the door behind her, and now stood smiling
with a clean apron on, so fresh and cheerful, that Jill hardly knew her
own mother.

“Things taste better when you have someone to eat with you,” observed
Jack, as they devoured sandwiches, and drank milk out of little mugs
with rosebuds on them.

“Don't eat too much, or you won't be ready for the next surprise,” said
his mother, when the plates were empty, and the last drop gone down
throats dry with much chatter.

“More surprises! Oh, what fun!” cried Jill. And all the rest of the
morning, in the intervals of talk and play, they tried to guess what it
could be.

At two o'clock they found out, for dinner was served in the Bird Room,
and the children revelled in the simple feast prepared for them. The
two mothers kept the little bed-tables well supplied, and fed their
nurslings like maternal birds, while Frank presided over the feast with
great dignity, and ate a dinner which would have astonished Mamma, if
she had not been too busy to observe how fast the mince pie vanished.

“The girls said Christmas was spoiled because of us; but I don't think
so, and they won't either, when they see this splendid place and know
all about our nice plans,” said Jill, luxuriously eating the nut-meats
Jack picked out for her, as they lay in Eastern style at the festive
board.

“I call this broken bones made easy. I never had a better Christmas.
Have a raisin? Here's a good fat one.” And Jack made a long arm to
Jill's mouth, which began to sing “Little Jack Horner” as an appropriate
return.

“It would have been a lonesome one to all of us, I'm thinking, but
for your mother, boys. My duty and hearty thanks to you, mem,” put in
grateful Mrs. Pecq, bowing over her coffee-cup as she had seen ladies
bow over their wine-glasses at dinner parties in Old England.

“I rise to propose a health, Our Mothers.” And Frank stood up with a
goblet of water, for not even at Christmas time was wine seen on that
table.

“Hip, hip, hurrah!” called Jack, baptizing himself with a good sprinkle,
as he waved his glass and drank the toast with a look that made his
mother's eyes fill with happy tears.

Jill threw her mother a kiss, feeling very grown up and elegant to be
dining out in such style. Then they drank every one's health with much
merriment, till Frank declared that Jack would float off on the deluge
of water he splashed about in his enthusiasm, and Mamma proposed a rest
after the merry-making.

“Now the best fun is coming, and we have not long to wait,” said the
boy, when naps and rides about the room had whiled away the brief
interval between dinner and dusk, for the evening entertainment was to
be an early one, to suit the invalids' bedtime.

“I hope the girls will like their things. I helped to choose them, and
each has a nice present. I don't know mine, though, and I'm in a twitter
to see it,” said Jill, as they lay waiting for the fun to begin.

“I do; I chose it, so I know you will like one of them, any way.”

“Have I got more than one?”

“I guess you'll think so when they are handed down. The bell was going
all day yesterday, and the girls kept bringing in bundles for you; I
see seven now,” and Jack rolled his eyes from one mysterious parcel to
another hanging on the laden boughs.

“I know something, too. That square bundle is what you want ever so
much. I told Frank, and he got it for his present. It is all red and
gold outside, and every sort of color inside; you'll hurrah when you see
it. That roundish one is yours too; I made them,” cried Jill, pointing
to a flat package tied to the stem of the tree, and a neat little roll
in which were the blue mittens that she had knit for him.

“I can wait;” but the boy's eyes shone with eagerness, and he could not
resist firing two or three pop-corns at it to see whether it was hard or
soft.

“That barking dog is for Boo, and the little yellow sled, so Molly can
drag him to school, he always tumbles down so when it is slippery,”
 continued Jill, proud of her superior knowledge, as she showed a small
spotted animal hanging by its tail, with a red tongue displayed as if
about to taste the sweeties in the horn below.

“Don't talk about sleds, for mercy's sake! I never want to see another,
and you wouldn't, either, if you had to lie with a flat-iron tied to
your ankle, as I do,” said Jack, with a kick of the well leg and an
ireful glance at the weight attached to the other that it might not
contract while healing.

“Well, I think plasters, and liniment, and rubbing, as bad as flat-irons
any day. I don't believe you have ached half so much as I have, though
it sounds worse to break legs than to sprain your back,” protested Jill,
eager to prove herself the greater sufferer, as invalids are apt to be.

“I guess you wouldn't think so if you'd been pulled round as I was when
they set my leg. Caesar, how it did hurt!” and Jack squirmed at the
recollection of it.

“You didn't faint away as I did when the doctor was finding out if my
_vertebrums_ were hurt, so now!” cried Jill, bound to carry her point,
though not at all clear what vertebrae were.

“Pooh! Girls always faint. Men are braver, and I didn't faint a bit in
spite of all that horrid agony.”

“You howled; Frank told me so. Doctor said _I_ was a brave girl, so
you needn't brag, for you'll have to go on a crutch for a while. I know
that.”

“You may have to use two of them for years, may be. I heard the doctor
tell my mother so. I shall be up and about long before you will. Now
then!”

Both children were getting excited, for the various pleasures of the
day had been rather too much for them, and there is no knowing but they
would have added the sad surprise of a quarrel to the pleasant ones of
the day, if a cheerful whistle had not been heard, as Ralph came in to
light the candles and give the last artistic touches to the room.

“Well, young folks, how goes it? Had a merry time so far?” he asked, as
he fixed the steps and ran up with a lighted match in his hand.

“Very nice, thank you,” answered a prim little voice from the dusk
below, for only the glow of the fire filled the room just then.

Jack said nothing, and two red sulky faces were hidden in the dark,
watching candle after candle sputter, brighten, and twinkle, till the
trembling shadows began to flit away like imps afraid of the light.

“Now he will see my face, and I know it is cross,” thought Jill, as
Ralph went round the last circle, leaving another line of sparks among
the hemlock boughs.

Jack thought the same, and had just got the frown smoothed out of his
forehead, when Frank brought a fresh log, and a glorious blaze sprung
up, filling every corner of the room, and dancing over the figures in
the long chairs till they had to brighten whether they liked it or not.
Presently the bell began to ring and gay voices to sound below: then
Jill smiled in spite of herself as Molly Loo's usual cry of “Oh, dear,
where _is_ that child?” reached her, and Jack could not help keeping
time to the march Ed played, while Frank and Gus marshalled the
procession.

“Ready!” cried Mrs. Minot, at last, and up came the troop of eager lads
and lasses, brave in holiday suits, with faces to match. A unanimous “O,
o, o!” burst from twenty tongues, as the full splendor of the tree, the
room, and its inmates, dawned upon them; for not only did the pretty
Christ-child hover above, but Santa Claus himself stood below, fur-clad,
white-bearded, and powdered with snow from the dredging-box.

Ralph was a good actor, and, when the first raptures were over he
distributed the presents with such droll speeches, jokes, and gambols,
that the room rang with merriment, and passers-by paused to listen, sure
that here, at least, Christmas was merry. It would be impossible to
tell about all the gifts or the joy of the receivers, but every one
was satisfied, and the king and queen of the revels so overwhelmed with
little tokens of good-will, that their beds looked like booths at a
fair. Jack beamed over the handsome postage-stamp book which had long
been the desire of his heart, and Jill felt like a millionaire, with a
silver fruit-knife, a pretty work-basket, and oh!--coals of fire on her
head!--a ring from Jack.

A simple little thing enough, with one tiny turquoise forget-me-not, but
something like a dew-drop fell on it when no one was looking, and she
longed to say, “I'm sorry I was cross; forgive me, Jack.” But it could
not be done then, so she turned to admire Merry's bed-shoes, the pots of
pansies, hyacinths, and geranium which Gus and his sisters sent for her
window garden, Molly's queer Christmas pie, and the zither Ed promised
to teach her how to play upon.

The tree was soon stripped, and pop-corns strewed the floor as the
children stood about picking them off the red threads when candy gave
out, with an occasional cranberry by way of relish. Boo insisted on
trying the new sled at once, and enlivened the trip by the squeaking
of the spotted dog, the toot of a tin trumpet, and shouts of joy at the
splendor of the turn-out.

The girls all put on their necklaces, and danced about like fine ladies
at a ball. The boys fell to comparing skates, balls, and cuff-buttons
on the spot, while the little ones devoted all their energies to eating
everything eatable they could lay their hands on.

Games were played till nine o'clock, and then the party broke up, after
they had taken hands round the tree and sung a song written by one whom
you all know,--so faithfully and beautifully does she love and labor for
children the world over.

THE BLESSED DAY

  “What shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
  What shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day in the morning?
  This shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
  Love and joy to Christ their king,
    On Christmas Day in the morning!

  “What shall little children sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
  What shall little children sing
    On Christmas Day in the morning?
  The grand old carols shall they sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
  With all their hearts, their offerings bring
    On Christmas Day in the morning.”

Jack was carried off to bed in such haste that he had only time to call
out, “Good-night!” before he was rolled away, gaping as he went. Jill
soon found herself tucked up in the great white bed she was to share
with her mother, and lay looking about the pleasant chamber, while Mrs.
Pecq ran home for a minute to see that all was safe there for the night.

After the merry din the house seemed very still, with only a light
step now and then, the murmur of voices not far away, or the jingle of
sleigh-bells from without, and the little girl rested easily among the
pillows, thinking over the pleasures of the day, too wide-awake for
sleep. There was no lamp in the chamber, but she could look into the
pretty Bird Room, where the fire-light still shone on flowery walls,
deserted tree, and Christ-child floating above the green. Jill's eyes
wandered there and lingered till they were full of regretful tears,
because the sight of the little angel recalled the words spoken when it
was hung up, the good resolution she had taken then, and how soon it was
broken.

“I said I couldn't be bad in that lovely place, and I was a cross,
ungrateful girl after all they've done for Mammy and me. Poor Jack _was_
hurt the worst, and he _was_ brave, though he did scream. I wish I could
go and tell him so, and hear him say, 'All right.' Oh, me, I've spoiled
the day!”

A great sob choked more words, and Jill was about to have a comfortable
cry, when someone entered the other room, and she saw Frank doing
something with a long cord and a thing that looked like a tiny drum.
Quiet as a bright-eyed mouse, Jill peeped out wondering what it was, and
suspecting mischief, for the boy was laughing to himself as he stretched
the cord, and now and then bent over the little object in his hand,
touching it with great care.

“May be it's a torpedo to blow up and scare me; Jack likes to play
tricks. Well, I'll scream loud when it goes off, so he will be satisfied
that I'm dreadfully frightened,” thought Jill, little dreaming what the
last surprise of the day was to be.

Presently a voice whispered,--

“I say! Are you awake?”

“Yes.”

“Any one there but you?”

“No.”

“Catch this, then. Hold it to your ear and see what you'll get.”

The little drum came flying in, and, catching it, Jill, with some
hesitation, obeyed Frank's order. Judge of her amazement when she caught
in broken whispers these touching words:--

“Sorry I was cross. Forgive and forget. Start fair to-morrow. All right.
Jack.”

Jill was so delighted with this handsome apology, that she could not
reply for a moment, then steadied her voice, and answered back in her
sweetest tone,--

“I'm sorry, too. Never, never, will again. Feel much better now.
Good-night, you dear old thing.”

Satisfied with the success of his telephone, Frank twitched back the
drum and vanished, leaving Jill to lay her cheek upon the hand that
wore the little ring and fall asleep, saying to herself, with a farewell
glance at the children's saint, dimly seen in the soft gloom, “I will
not forget. I will be good!”




Chapter VII. Jill's Mission


The good times began immediately, and very little studying was done that
week in spite of the virtuous resolutions made by certain young persons
on Christmas Day. But, dear me, how was it possible to settle down to
lessons in the delightful Bird Room, with not only its own charms to
distract one, but all the new gifts to enjoy, and a dozen calls a day to
occupy one's time?

“I guess we'd better wait till the others are at school, and just go in
for fun this week,” said Jack, who was in great spirits at the prospect
of getting up, for the splints were off, and he hoped to be promoted to
crutches very soon.

“_I_ shall keep my Speller by me and take a look at it every day, for
that is what I'm most backward in. But I intend to devote myself to you,
Jack, and be real kind and useful. I've made a plan to do it, and I
mean to carry it out, any way,” answered Jill, who had begun to be a
missionary, and felt that this was a field of labor where she could
distinguish herself.

“Here's a home mission all ready for you, and you can be paying your
debts beside doing yourself good,” Mrs. Pecq said to her in private,
having found plenty to do herself.

Now Jill made one great mistake at the outset--she forgot that she was
the one to be converted to good manners and gentleness, and devoted
her efforts to looking after Jack, finding it much easier to cure other
people's faults than her own. Jack was a most engaging heathen, and
needed very little instruction; therefore Jill thought her task would
be an easy one. But three or four weeks of petting and play had rather
demoralized both children, so Jill's Speller, though tucked under the
sofa pillow every day, was seldom looked at, and Jack shirked his Latin
shamefully. Both read all the story-books they could get, held daily
levees in the Bird Room, and all their spare minutes were spent in
teaching Snowdrop, the great Angora cat, to bring the ball when they
dropped it in their game. So Saturday came, and both were rather the
worse for so much idleness, since daily duties and studies are the
wholesome bread which feeds the mind better than the dyspeptic plum-cake
of sensational reading, or the unsubstantial _bon-bons_ of frivolous
amusement.

It was a stormy day, so they had few callers, and devoted themselves to
arranging the album; for these books were all the rage just then, and
boys met to compare, discuss, buy, sell, and “swap” stamps with as much
interest as men on 'Change gamble in stocks. Jack had a nice little
collection, and had been saving up pocket-money to buy a book in which
to preserve his treasures. Now, thanks to Jill's timely suggestion,
Frank had given him a fine one, and several friends had contributed a
number of rare stamps to grace the large, inviting pages. Jill wielded
the gum-brush and fitted on the little flaps, as her fingers were
skilful at this nice work, and Jack put each stamp in its proper place
with great rustling of leaves and comparing of marks. Returning, after a
brief absence, Mrs. Minot beheld the countenances of the workers adorned
with gay stamps, giving them a very curious appearance.

“My dears! what new play have you got now? Are you wild Indians?
or letters that have gone round the world before finding the right
address?” she asked, laughing at the ridiculous sight, for both were as
sober as judges and deeply absorbed in some doubtful specimen.

“Oh, we just stuck them there to keep them safe; they get lost if we
leave them lying round. It's very handy, for I can see in a minute what
I want on Jill's face and she on mine, and put our fingers on the
right chap at once,” answered Jack, adding, with an anxious gaze at his
friend's variegated countenance, “Where the dickens _is_ my New Granada?
It's rare, and I wouldn't lose it for a dollar.”

“Why, there it is on your own nose. Don't you remember you put it there
because you said mine was not big enough to hold it?” laughed Jill,
tweaking a large orange square off the round nose of her neighbor,
causing it to wrinkle up in a droll way, as the gum made the operation
slightly painful.

“So I did, and gave you Little Bolivar on yours. Now I'll have Alsace
and Lorraine, 1870. There are seven of them, so hold still and see how
you like it,” returned Jack, picking the large, pale stamps one by one
from Jill's forehead, which they crossed like a band.

She bore it without flinching, saying to herself with a secret smile, as
she glanced at the hot fire, which scorched her if she kept near enough
to Jack to help him, “This really is being like a missionary, with a
tattooed savage to look after. I have to suffer a little, as the good
folks did who got speared and roasted sometimes; but I won't complain a
bit, though my forehead smarts, my arms are tired, and one cheek is as
red as fire.”

“The Roman States make a handsome page, don't they?” asked Jack, little
dreaming of the part he was playing in Jill's mind. “Oh, I say, isn't
Corea a beauty? I'm ever so proud of that;” and he gazed fondly on a big
blue stamp, the sole ornament of one page.

“I don't see why the Cape of Good Hope has pyramids. They ought to go in
Egypt. The Sandwich Islands are all right, with heads of the black kings
and queens on them,” said Jill, feeling that they were very appropriate
to her private play.

“Turkey has crescents, Australia swans, and Spain women's heads, with
black bars across them. Frank says it is because they keep women shut
up so; but that was only his fun. I'd rather have a good, honest green
United States, with Washington on it, or a blue one-center with old
Franklin, than all their eagles and lions and kings and queens put
together,” added the democratic boy, with a disrespectful slap on a
crowned head as he settled Heligoland in its place.

“Why does Austria have Mercury on the stamp, I wonder? Do they wear
helmets like that?” asked Jill, with the brush-handle in her mouth as
she cut a fresh batch of flaps.

“May be he was postman to the gods, so he is put on stamps now. The
Prussians wear helmets, but they have spikes like the old Roman fellows.
I like Prussians ever so much; they fight splendidly, and always beat.
Austrians have a handsome uniform, though.”

“Talking of Romans reminds me that I have not heard your Latin for two
days. Come, lazybones, brace up, and let us have it now. I've done my
compo, and shall have just time before I go out for a tramp with Gus,”
 said Frank, putting by a neat page to dry, for he studied every day like
a conscientious lad as he was.

“Don't know it. Not going to try till next week. Grind away over your
old Greek as much as you like, but don't bother me,” answered Jack,
frowning at the mere thought of the detested lesson.

But Frank adored his Xenophon, and would not see his old friend,
Caesar, neglected without an effort to defend him; so he confiscated the
gum-pot, and effectually stopped the stamp business by whisking away at
one fell swoop all that lay on Jill's table.

“Now then, young man, you will quit this sort of nonsense and do your
lesson, or you won't see these fellows again in a hurry. You asked me to
hear you, and I'm going to do it; here's the book.”

Frank's tone was the dictatorial one, which Jack hated and always found
hard to obey, especially when he knew he ought to do it. Usually, when
his patience was tried, he strode about the room, or ran off for a race
round the garden, coming back breathless, but good-tempered. Now both
these vents for irritation were denied him, and he had fallen into
the way of throwing things about in a pet. He longed to send Caesar
to perpetual banishment in the fire blazing close by, but resisted the
temptation, and answered honestly, though gruffly: “I know I did, but I
don't see any use in pouncing on a fellow when he isn't ready. I haven't
got my lesson, and don't mean to worry about it; so you may just give me
back my things and go about your business.”

“I'll give you back a stamp for every perfect lesson you get, and you
won't see them on any other terms;” and, thrusting the treasures into
his pocket, Frank caught up his rubber boots, and went off swinging them
like a pair of clubs, feeling that he would give a trifle to be able to
use them on his lazy brother.

At this high-handed proceeding, and the threat which accompanied it,
Jack's patience gave out, and catching up Caesar, as he thought, sent
him flying after the retreating tyrant with the defiant declaration,--

“Keep them, then, and your old book, too! I won't look at it till you
give all my stamps back and say you are sorry. So now!”

It was all over before Mamma could interfere, or Jill do more than
clutch and cling to the gum-brush. Frank vanished unharmed, but the poor
book dashed against the wall to fall half open on the floor, its gay
cover loosened, and its smooth leaves crushed by the blow.

“It's the album! O Jack, how could you?” cried Jill, dismayed at sight
of the precious book so maltreated by the owner.

“Thought it was the other. Guess it isn't hurt much. Didn't mean to
hit him, any way. He does provoke me so,” muttered Jack, very red and
shamefaced as his mother picked up the book and laid it silently on
the table before him. He did not know what to do with himself, and was
thankful for the stamps still left him, finding great relief in making
faces as he plucked them one by one from his mortified countenance. Jill
looked on, half glad, half sorry that her savage showed such signs of
unconverted ferocity, and Mrs. Minot went on writing letters, wearing
the grave look her sons found harder to bear than another person's
scolding. No one spoke for a moment, and the silence was becoming
awkward when Gus appeared in a rubber suit, bringing a book to Jack from
Laura and a note to Jill from Lotty.

“Look here, you just trundle me into my den, please, I'm going to have a
nap, it's so dull to-day I don't feel like doing much,” said Jack, when
Gus had done his errands, trying to look as if he knew nothing about the
fracas.

Jack folded his arms and departed like a warrior borne from the
battle-field, to be chaffed unmercifully for a “pepper-pot,” while Gus
made him comfortable in his own room.

“I heard once of a boy who threw a fork at his brother and put his eye
out. But he didn't mean to, and the brother forgave him, and he never
did so any more,” observed Jill, in a pensive tone, wishing to show that
she felt all the dangers of impatience, but was sorry for the culprit.

“Did the boy ever forgive himself?” asked Mrs. Minot.

“No, 'm; I suppose not. But Jack didn't hit Frank, and feels real sorry,
I know.”

“He might have, and hurt him very much. Our actions are in our own
hands, but the consequences of them are not. Remember that, my dear, and
think twice before you do anything.”

“Yes, 'm, I will;” and Jill composed herself to consider what
missionaries usually did when the natives hurled tomahawks and
boomerangs at one another, and defied the rulers of the land.

Mrs. Minot wrote one page of a new letter, then stopped, pushed her
papers about, thought a little, and finally got up, saying, as if she
found it impossible to resist the yearning of her heart for the naughty
boy,--

“I am going to see if Jack is covered up, he is so helpless, and liable
to take cold. Don't stir till I come back.”

“No, 'm, I won't.”

Away went the tender parent to find her son studying Caesar for dear
life, and all the more amiable for the little gust which had blown away
the temporary irritability. The brothers were often called “Thunder
and Lightning,” because Frank lowered and growled and was a good while
clearing up, while Jack's temper came and went like a flash, and the air
was all the clearer for the escape of dangerous electricity. Of course
Mamma had to stop and deliver a little lecture, illustrated by sad tales
of petulant boys, and punctuated with kisses which took off the edge of
these afflicting narratives.

Jill meantime meditated morally on the superiority of her own good
temper over the hasty one of her dear playmate, and just when she was
feeling unusually uplifted and secure, alas! like so many of us, she
fell, in the most deplorable manner.

Glancing about the room for something to do, she saw a sheet of paper
lying exactly out of reach, where it had fluttered from the table
unperceived. At first her eye rested on it as carelessly as it did on
the stray stamp Frank had dropped; then, as if one thing suggested the
other, she took it into her head that the paper was Frank's composition,
or, better still, a note to Annette, for the two corresponded when
absence or weather prevented the daily meeting at school.

“Wouldn't it be fun to keep it till he gives back Jack's stamps? It
would plague him so if it was a note, and I do believe it is, for
compo's don't begin with two words on one side. I'll get it, and Jack
and I will plan some way to pay him off, cross thing!”

Forgetting her promise not to stir, also how dishonorable it was to read
other people's letters, Jill caught up the long-handled hook, often in
use now, and tried to pull the paper nearer. It would not come at once,
for a seam in the carpet held it, and Jill feared to tear or crumple it
if she was not very careful. The hook was rather heavy and long for
her to manage, and Jack usually did the fishing, so she was not very
skilful; and just as she was giving a particularly quick jerk, she lost
her balance, fell off the sofa, and dropped the pole with a bang.

“Oh, my back!” was all she could think or say as she felt the jar all
through her little body, and a corresponding fear in her guilty little
mind that someone would come and find out the double mischief she had
been at. For a moment she lay quite still to recover from the shock,
then as the pain passed she began to wonder how she should get back, and
looked about her to see if she could do it alone. She thought she could,
as the sofa was near and she had improved so much that she could sit
up a little if the doctor would have let her. She was gathering herself
together for the effort, when, within arm's reach now, she saw the
tempting paper, and seized it with glee, for in spite of her predicament
she did want to tease Frank. A glance showed that it was not the
composition nor a note, but the beginning of a letter from Mrs. Minot to
her sister, and Jill was about to lay it down when her own name caught
her eye, and she could not resist reading it. Hard words to write of one
so young, doubly hard to read, and impossible to forget.

“Dear Lizzie,--Jack continues to do very well, and will soon be up
again. But we begin to fear that the little girl is permanently injured
in the back. She is here, and we do our best for her; but I never
look at her without thinking of Lucinda Snow, who, you remember, was
bedridden for twenty years, owing to a fall at fifteen. Poor little
Janey does not know yet, and I hope”--There it ended, and “poor little
Janey's” punishment for disobedience began that instant. She thought she
was getting well because she did not suffer all the time, and every one
spoke cheerfully about “by and by.” Now she knew the truth, and shut her
eyes with a shiver as she said, low, to herself,--

“Twenty years! I couldn't bear it; oh, I couldn't bear it!”

A very miserable Jill lay on the floor, and for a while did not care who
came and found her; then the last words of the letter--“I hope”--seemed
to shine across the blackness of the dreadful “twenty years” and cheer
her up a bit, for despair never lives long in young hearts, and Jill was
a brave child.

“That is why Mammy sighs so when she dresses me, and every one is so
good to me. Perhaps Mrs. Minot doesn't really know, after all. She was
dreadfully scared about Jack, and he is getting well. I'd like to ask
Doctor, but he might find out about the letter. Oh, dear, why didn't I
keep still and let the horrid thing alone!”

As she thought that, Jill pushed the paper away, pulled herself up, and
with much painful effort managed to get back to her sofa, where she laid
herself down with a groan, feeling as if the twenty years had already
passed over her since she tumbled off.

“I've told a lie, for I said I wouldn't stir. I've hurt my back, I've
done a mean thing, and I've got paid for it. A nice missionary I am;
I'd better begin at home, as Mammy told me to;” and Jill groaned again,
remembering her mother's words. “Now I've got another secret to keep all
alone, for I'd be ashamed to tell the girls. I guess I'll turn round and
study my spelling; then no one will see my face.”

Jill looked the picture of a good, industrious child as she lay with her
back to the large table, her book held so that nothing was to be seen
but one cheek and a pair of lips moving busily. Fortunately, it is
difficult for little sinners to act a part, and, even if the face is
hidden, something in the body seems to betray the internal remorse and
shame. Usually, Jill lay flat and still; now her back was bent in a
peculiar way as she leaned over her book, and one foot wagged nervously,
while on the visible cheek was a Spanish stamp with a woman's face
looking through the black bars, very suggestively, if she had known it.
How long the minutes seemed till some one came, and what a queer little
jump her heart gave when Mrs. Minot's voice said, cheerfully, “Jack
is all right, and, I declare, so is Jill. I really believe there is a
telegraph still working somewhere between you two, and each knows what
the other is about without words.”

“I didn't have any other book handy, so I thought I'd study awhile,”
 answered Jill, feeling that she deserved no praise for her seeming
industry.

She cast a sidelong glance as she spoke, and seeing that Mrs. Minot was
looking for the letter, hid her face and lay so still she could hear the
rustle of the paper as it was taken from the floor. It was well she did
not also see the quick look the lady gave her as she turned the letter
and found a red stamp sticking to the under side, for this unlucky
little witness told the story.

Mrs. Minot remembered having seen the stamp lying close to the sofa when
she left the room, for she had had half a mind to take it to Jack, but
did not, thinking Frank's plan had some advantages. She also recollected
that a paper flew off the table, but being in haste she had not stopped
to see what it was. Now, the stamp and the letter could hardly have come
together without hands, for they lay a yard apart, and here, also, on
the unwritten portion of the page, was the mark of a small green thumb.
Jill had been winding wool for a stripe in her new afghan, and the green
ball lay on her sofa. These signs suggested and confirmed what Mrs.
Minot did not want to believe; so did the voice, attitude, and air of
Jill, all very unlike her usual open, alert ways.

The kind lady could easily forgive the reading of her letter since the
girl had found such sad news there, but the dangers of disobedience were
serious in her case, and a glance showed that she was suffering either
in mind or body--perhaps both.

“I will wait for her to tell me. She is an honest child, and the truth
will soon come out,” thought Mrs. Minot, as she took a clean sheet, and
Jill tried to study.

“Shall I hear your lesson, dear? Jack means to recite his like a good
boy, so suppose you follow his example,” she said, presently.

“I don't know as I can say it, but I'll try.”

Jill did try, and got on bravely till she came to the word “permanent;”
 there she hesitated, remembering where she saw it last.

“Do you know what that means?” asked her teacher, thinking to help her
on by defining the word.

“Always--for a great while--or something like that; doesn't it?”
 faltered Jill, with a tight feeling in her throat, and the color coming
up, as she tried to speak easily, yet felt so shame-stricken she could
not.

“Are you in pain, my child? Never mind the lesson; tell me, and I'll do
something for you.”

The kind words, the soft hand on her hot cheek, and the pity in the eyes
that looked at her, were too much for Jill. A sob came first, and then
the truth, told with hidden face and tears that washed the blush away,
and set free the honest little soul that could not hide its fault from
such a friend.

“I knew it all before, and was sure you would tell me, else you would
not be the child I love and like to help so well.”

Then, while she soothed Jill's trouble, Mrs. Minot told her story and
showed the letter, wishing to lessen, if possible, some part of the pain
it had given.

“Sly old stamp! To go and tell on me when I meant to own up, and get
some credit if I could, after being so mean and bad,” said Jill, smiling
through her tears when she saw the tell-tale witnesses against her.

“You had better stick it in your book to remind you of the bad
consequences of disobedience, then perhaps _this_ lesson will leave a
'permanent' impression on your mind and memory,” answered Mrs. Minot,
glad to see her natural gayety coming back, and hoping that she had
forgotten the contents of the unfortunate letter. But she had not; and
presently, when the sad affair had been talked over and forgiven, Jill
asked, slowly, as she tried to put on a brave look,--

“Please tell me about Lucinda Snow. If I am to be like her, I might as
well know how she managed to bear it so long.”

“I'm sorry you ever heard of her, and yet perhaps it may help you to
bear your trial, dear, which I hope will never be as heavy a one as
hers. This Lucinda I knew for years, and though at first I thought her
fate the saddest that could be, I came at last to see how happy she was
in spite of her affliction, how good and useful and beloved.”

“Why, how could she be? What did she do?” cried Jill, forgetting her own
troubles to look up with an open, eager face again.

“She was so patient, other people were ashamed to complain of their
small worries; so cheerful, that her own great one grew lighter; so
industrious, that she made both money and friends by pretty things she
worked and sold to her many visitors. And, best of all, so wise and
sweet that she seemed to get good out of everything, and make her poor
room a sort of chapel where people went for comfort, counsel, and an
example of a pious life. So, you see, Lucinda was not so very miserable
after all.”

“Well, if I could not be as I was, I'd like to be a woman like that.
Only, I hope I shall not!” answered Jill, thoughtfully at first, then
coming out so decidedly with the last words that it was evident the life
of a bedridden saint was not at all to her mind.

“So do I; and I mean to believe that you will not. Meantime, we can try
to make the waiting as useful and pleasant as possible. This painful
little back will be a sort of conscience to remind you of what you ought
to do and leave undone, and so you can be learning obedience. Then,
when the body is strong, it will have formed a good habit to make duty
easier; and my Lucinda can be a sweet example, even while lying here, if
she chooses.”

“Can I?” and Jill's eyes were full of softer tears as the comfortable,
cheering words sank into her heart, to blossom slowly by and by into her
life, for this was to be a long lesson, hard to learn, but very useful
in the years to come.

When the boys returned, after the Latin was recited and peace restored,
Jack showed her a recovered stamp promptly paid by Frank, who was as
just as he was severe, and Jill asked for the old red one, though
she did not tell why she wanted it, nor show it put away in the
spelling-book, a little seal upon a promise made to be kept.




Chapter VIII. Merry and Molly


Now let us see how the other missionaries got on with their tasks.

Farmer Grant was a thrifty, well-to-do man, anxious to give his children
greater advantages than he had enjoyed, and to improve the fine place
of which he was justly proud. Mrs. Grant was a notable housewife, as
ambitious and industrious as her husband, but too busy to spend any time
on the elegancies of life, though always ready to help the poor and sick
like a good neighbor and Christian woman. The three sons--Tom, Dick,
and Harry--were big fellows of seventeen, nineteen, and twenty-one;
the first two on the farm, and the elder in a store just setting up for
himself. Kind-hearted but rough-mannered youths, who loved Merry very
much, but teased her sadly about her “fine lady airs,” as they called
her dainty ways and love of beauty.

Merry was a thoughtful girl, full of innocent fancies, refined tastes,
and romantic dreams, in which no one sympathized at home, though she was
the pet of the family. It did seem, to an outsider, as if the delicate
little creature had got there by mistake, for she looked very like a
tea-rose in a field of clover and dandelions, whose highest aim in life
was to feed cows and help make root beer.

When the girls talked over the new society, it pleased Merry very much,
and she decided not only to try and love work better, but to convert
her family to a liking for pretty things, as she called her own more
cultivated tastes.

“I will begin at once, and show them that I don't mean to shirk my duty,
though I do want to be nice,” thought she, as she sat at supper one
night and looked about her, planning her first move.

Not a very cheering prospect for a lover of the beautiful, certainly,
for the big kitchen, though as neat as wax, had nothing lovely in it,
except a red geranium blooming at the window. Nor were the people all
that could be desired, in some respects, as they sat about the table
shovelling in pork and beans with their knives, drinking tea from their
saucers, and laughing out with a hearty “Haw, haw,” when anything amused
them. Yet the boys were handsome, strong specimens, the farmer a hale,
benevolent-looking man, the housewife a pleasant, sharp-eyed matron, who
seemed to find comfort in looking often at the bright face at her elbow,
with the broad forehead, clear eyes, sweet mouth, and quiet voice that
came like music in among the loud masculine ones, or the quick, nervous
tones of a woman always in a hurry.

Merry's face was so thoughtful that evening that her father observed it,
for, when at home, he watched her as one watches a kitten, glad to see
anything so pretty, young, and happy, at its play.

“Little daughter has got something on her mind, I mistrust. Come and
tell father all about it,” he said, with a sounding slap on his broad
knee as he turned his chair from the table to the ugly stove, where
three pairs of wet boots steamed underneath, and a great kettle of cider
apple-sauce simmered above.

“When I've helped clear up, I'll come and talk. Now, mother, you sit
down and rest; Roxy and I can do everything,” answered Merry, patting
the old rocking-chair so invitingly that the tired woman could not
resist, especially as watching the kettle gave her an excuse for
obeying.

“Well, I don't care if I do, for I've been on my feet since five
o'clock. Be sure you cover things up, and shut the buttery door, and put
the cat down cellar, and sift your meal. I'll see to the buckwheats last
thing before I go to bed.”

Mrs. Grant subsided with her knitting, for her hands were never idle;
Tom tilted his chair back against the wall and picked his teeth with
his pen-knife; Dick got out a little pot of grease, to make the boots
water-tight; and Harry sat down at the small table to look over his
accounts, with an important air,--for every one occupied this room, and
the work was done in the out-kitchen behind.

Merry hated clearing up, but dutifully did every distasteful task, and
kept her eye on careless Roxy till all was in order; then she gladly
went to perch on her father's knee, seeing in all the faces about her
the silent welcome they always wore for the “little one.”

“Yes, I do want something, but I know you will say it is silly,” she
began, as her father pinched her blooming cheek, with the wish that his
peaches would ever look half as well.

“Shouldn't wonder if it was a doll now;” and Mr. Grant stroked her head
with an indulgent smile, as if she was about six instead of fifteen.

“Why, father, you know I don't! I haven't played with dollies for years
and years. No; I want to fix up my room pretty, like Jill's. I'll do it
all myself, and only want a few things, for I don't expect it to look as
nice as hers.”

Indignation gave Merry courage to state her wishes boldly, though she
knew the boys would laugh. They did, and her mother said in a tone of
surprise,--

“Why, child, what more can you want? I'm sure your room is always as
neat as a new pin, thanks to your bringing up, and I told you to have a
fire there whenever you wanted to.”

“Let me have some old things out of the garret, and I'll show you what
I want. It _is_ neat, but so bare and ugly I hate to be there. I do so
love something pretty to look at!” and Merry gave a little shiver of
disgust as she turned her eyes away from the large greasy boot Dick was
holding up to be sure it was well lubricated all round.

“So do I, and that's a fact. I couldn't get on without my pretty girl
here, any way. Why, she touches up the old place better than a dozen
flower-pots in full blow,” said the farmer, as his eye went from the
scarlet geranium to the bright young face so near his own.

“I wish I had a dozen in the sitting-room window. Mother says they are
not tidy, but I'd keep them neat, and I know you'd like it,” broke in
Merry, glad of the chance to get one of the long-desired wishes of her
heart fulfilled.

“I'll fetch you some next time I go over to Ballad's. Tell me what you
want, and we'll have a posy bed somewhere round, see if we don't,” said
her father, dimly understanding what she wanted.

“Now, if mother says I may fix my room, I shall be satisfied, and I'll
do my chores without a bit of fuss, to show how grateful I am,” said
the girl, thanking her father with a kiss, and smiling at her mother so
wistfully that the good woman could not refuse.

“You may have anything you like out of the blue chest. There's a lot of
things there that the moths got at after Grandma died, and I couldn't
bear to throw or give 'em away. Trim up your room as you like, and mind
you don't forget your part of the bargain,” answered Mrs. Grant, seeing
profit in the plan.

“I won't; I'll work all the morning to-morrow, and in the afternoon I'll
get ready to show you what I call a nice, pretty room,” answered Merry,
looking so pleased it seemed as if another flower had blossomed in the
large bare kitchen.

She kept her word, and the very stormy afternoon when Jill got into
trouble, Merry was working busily at her little bower. In the blue chest
she found a variety of treasures, and ignoring the moth holes, used them
to the best advantage, trying to imitate the simple comfort with a touch
of elegance which prevailed in Mrs. Minot's back bedroom.

Three faded red-moreen curtains went up at the windows over the chilly
paper shades, giving a pleasant glow to the bare walls. A red quilt with
white stars, rather the worse for many washings, covered the bed, and a
gay cloth the table, where a judicious arrangement of books and baskets
concealed the spots. The little air-tight stove was banished, and a pair
of ancient andirons shone in the fire-light. Grandma's last and largest
braided rug lay on the hearth, and her brass candlesticks adorned the
bureau, over the mirror of which was festooned a white muslin skirt,
tied up with Merry's red sash. This piece of elegance gave the last
touch to her room, she thought, and she was very proud of it, setting
forth all her small store of trinkets in a large shell, with an empty
scent bottle, and a clean tidy over the pincushion. On the walls she
hung three old-fashioned pictures, which she ventured to borrow from
the garret till better could be found. One a mourning piece, with a very
tall lady weeping on an urn in a grove of willows, and two small boys in
knee breeches and funny little square tails to their coats, looking like
cherubs in large frills. The other was as good as a bonfire, being an
eruption of Vesuvius, and very lurid indeed, for the Bay of Naples was
boiling like a pot, the red sky raining rocks, and a few distracted
people lying flat upon the shore. The third was a really pretty scene
of children dancing round a May-pole, for though nearly a hundred years
old, the little maids smiled and the boys pranced as gayly as if the
flowers they carried were still alive and sweet.

“Now I'll call them all to see, and say that it is pretty. Then I'll
enjoy it, and come here when things look dismal and bare everywhere
else,” said Merry, when at last it was done. She had worked all the
afternoon, and only finished at supper time, so the candles had to be
lighted that the toilette might look its best, and impress the beholders
with an idea of true elegance. Unfortunately, the fire smoked a little,
and a window was set ajar to clear the room; an evil-disposed gust blew
in, wafting the thin drapery within reach of the light, and when Merry
threw open the door proudly thinking to display her success, she was
horrified to find the room in a blaze, and half her labor all in vain.

The conflagration was over in a minute, however, for the boys tore down
the muslin and stamped out the fire with much laughter, while Mrs. Grant
bewailed the damage to her carpet, and poor Merry took refuge in
her father's arms, refusing to be comforted in spite of his kind
commendation of “Grandma's fixins.”

The third little missionary had the hardest time of all, and her first
efforts were not much more satisfactory nor successful than the others.
Her father was away from morning till night, and then had his paper to
read, books to keep, or “a man to see down town,” so that, after a hasty
word at tea, he saw no more of the children till another evening, as
they were seldom up at his early breakfast. He thought they were well
taken care of, for Miss Bathsheba Dawes was an energetic, middle-aged
spinster when she came into the family, and had been there fifteen
years, so he did not observe, what a woman would have seen at once, that
Miss Bat was getting old and careless, and everything about the house
was at sixes and sevens. She took good care of him, and thought she had
done her duty if she got three comfortable meals, nursed the children
when they were ill, and saw that the house did not burn up. So Maria
Louisa and Napoleon Bonaparte got on as they could, without the tender
cares of a mother. Molly had been a happy-go-lucky child, contented
with her pets, her freedom, and little Boo to love; but now she was just
beginning to see that they were not like other children, and to feel
ashamed of it.

“Papa is busy, but Miss Bat ought to see to us; she is paid for it,
and goodness knows she has an easy time now, for if I ask her to do
anything, she groans over her bones, and tells me young folks should
wait on themselves. I take all the care of Boo off her hands, but I
can't wash my own things, and he hasn't a decent trouser to his blessed
little legs. I'd tell papa, but it wouldn't do any good; he'd only say,
'Yes, child, yes, I'll attend to it,' and never do a thing.”

This used to be Molly's lament, when some especially trying event
occurred, and if the girls were not there to condole with her, she would
retire to the shed-chamber, call her nine cats about her, and, sitting
in the old bushel basket, pull her hair about her ears, and scold all
alone. The cats learned to understand this habit, and nobly did their
best to dispel the gloom which now and then obscured the sunshine of
their little mistress. Some of them would creep into her lap and purr
till the comfortable sound soothed her irritation; the sedate elders sat
at her feet blinking with such wise and sympathetic faces, that she felt
as if half a dozen Solomons were giving her the sagest advice; while the
kittens frisked about, cutting up their drollest capers till she laughed
in spite of herself. When the laugh came, the worst of the fit was over,
and she soon cheered up, dismissing the consolers with a pat all round,
a feast of good things from Miss Bat's larder, and the usual speech:--

“Well, dears, it's of no use to worry. I guess we shall get along
somehow, if we don't fret.”

With which wise resolution, Molly would leave her retreat and freshen
up her spirits by a row on the river or a romp with Boo, which always
finished the case. Now, however, she was bound to try the new plan and
do something toward reforming not only the boy's condition, but the
disorder and discomfort of home.

“I'll play it is Siam, and this the house of a native, and I'm come to
show the folks how to live nicely. Miss Bat won't know what to make of
it, and I can't tell her, so I shall get some fun out of it, any way,”
 thought Molly, as she surveyed the dining-room the day her mission
began.

The prospect was not cheering; and, if the natives of Siam live in such
confusion, it is high time they were attended to. The breakfast-table
still stood as it was left, with slops of coffee on the cloth; bits of
bread, egg-shells, and potato-skins lay about, and one lonely sausage
was cast away in the middle of a large platter. The furniture was dusty,
stove untidy, and the carpet looked as if crumbs had been scattered to
chickens who declined their breakfast. Boo was sitting on the sofa, with
his arm through a hole in the cover, hunting for some lost treasure
put away there for safe keeping, like a little magpie as he was. Molly
fancied she washed and dressed him well enough; but to-day she seemed to
see more clearly, and sighed as she thought of the hard job in store for
her if she gave him the thorough washing he needed, and combed out that
curly mop of hair.

“I'll clear up first and do that by and by. I ought to have a nice
little tub and good towels, like Mrs. Minot, and I will, too, if I buy
them myself,” she said, piling up cups with an energy that threatened
destruction to handles.

Miss Bat, who was trailing about the kitchen, with her head pinned up
in a little plaid shawl, was so surprised by the demand for a pan of
hot water and four clean towels, that she nearly dropped her snuff-box,
chief comfort of her lazy soul.

“What new whimsey now? Generally, the dishes stand round till I have
time to pick 'em up, and you are off coasting or careering somewhere.
Well, this tidy fit won't last long, so I may as well make the most of
it,” said Miss Bat, as she handed out the required articles, and then
pushed her spectacles from the tip of her sharp nose to her sharper
black eyes for a good look at the girl who stood primly before her, with
a clean apron on and her hair braided up instead of flying wildly about
her shoulders.

“Umph!” was all the comment that Miss Bat made on this unusual neatness,
and she went on scraping her saucepans, while Molly returned to her
work, very well pleased with the effect of her first step, for she felt
that the bewilderment of Miss Bat would be a constant inspiration to
fresh efforts.

An hour of hard work produced an agreeable change in the abode of
the native, for the table was cleared, room swept and dusted, fire
brightened, and the holes in the sofa-covering were pinned up till time
could be found to mend them. To be sure, rolls of lint lay in corners,
smears of ashes were on the stove hearth, and dust still lurked on
chair rounds and table legs. But too much must not be expected of a
new convert, so the young missionary sat down to rest, well pleased and
ready for another attempt as soon as she could decide in what direction
it should be made. She quailed before Boo as she looked at the
unconscious innocent peacefully playing with the spotted dog, now bereft
of his tail, and the lone sausage with which he was attempting to feed
the hungry animal, whose red mouth always gaped for more.

“It will be an awful job, and he is so happy I won't plague him yet.
Guess I'll go and put my room to rights first, and pick up some clean
clothes to put on him, if he is alive after I get through with him,”
 thought Molly, foreseeing a stormy passage for the boy, who hated a bath
as much as some people hate a trip across the Atlantic.

Up she went, and finding the fire out felt discouraged, thought she
would rest a little more, so retired under the blankets to read one of
the Christmas books. The dinner-bell rang while she was still wandering
happily in “Nelly's Silver Mine,” and she ran down to find that Boo had
laid out a railroad all across her neat room, using bits of coal for
sleepers and books for rails, over which he was dragging the yellow sled
laden with a dismayed kitten, the tailless dog, and the remains of the
sausage, evidently on its way to the tomb, for Boo took bites at it now
and then, no other lunch being offered him.

“Oh dear! why can't boys play without making such a mess,” sighed Molly,
picking up the feathers from the duster with which Boo had been trying
to make a “cocky-doo” of the hapless dog. “I'll wash him right after
dinner, and that will keep him out of mischief for a while,” she
thought, as the young engineer unsuspiciously proceeded to ornament his
already crocky countenance with squash, cranberry sauce, and gravy, till
he looked more like a Fiji chief in full war-paint than a Christian boy.

“I want two pails of hot water, please, Miss Bat, and the big tub,” said
Molly, as the ancient handmaid emptied her fourth cup of tea, for she
dined with the family, and enjoyed her own good cooking in its prime.

“What are you going to wash now?”

“Boo--I'm sure he needs it enough;” and Molly could not help laughing as
the victim added to his brilliant appearance by smearing the colors
all together with a rub of two grimy hands, making a fine “Turner” of
himself.

“Now, Maria Louisa Bemis, you ain't going to cut up no capers with that
child! The idea of a hot bath in the middle of the day, and him full
of dinner, and croupy into the bargain! Wet a corner of a towel at the
kettle-spout and polish him off if you like, but you won't risk his life
in no bath-tubs this cold day.”

Miss Bat's word was law in some things, so Molly had to submit, and took
Boo away, saying, loftily, as she left the room,--

“I shall ask father, and do it to-night, for I will _not_ have my
brother look like a pig.”

“My patience! how the Siamese do leave their things round,” she
exclaimed, as she surveyed her room after making up the fire and
polishing off Boo. “I'll put things in order, and then mend up my rags,
if I can find my thimble. Now, let me see;” and she went to exploring
her closet, bureau, and table, finding such disorder everywhere that her
courage nearly gave out.

She had clothes enough, but all needed care; even her best dress had two
buttons off, and her Sunday hat but one string. Shoes, skirts, books,
and toys lay about, and her drawers were a perfect chaos of soiled
ruffles, odd gloves, old ribbons, boot lacings, and bits of paper.

“Oh, my heart, what a muddle! Mrs. Minot wouldn't think much of me if
she could see that,” said Molly, recalling how that lady once said she
could judge a good deal of a little girl's character and habits by a
peep at her top drawer, and went on, with great success, to guess how
each of the school-mates kept her drawer.

“Come, missionary, clear up, and don't let me find such a glory-hole
again, or I'll report you to the society,” said Molly, tipping the whole
drawer-full out upon the bed, and beguiling the tiresome job by keeping
up the new play.

Twilight came before it was done, and a great pile of things loomed up
on her table, with no visible means of repair,--for Molly's work-basket
was full of nuts, and her thimble down a hole in the shed-floor, where
the cats had dropped it in their play.

“I'll ask Bat for hooks and tape, and papa for some money to buy
scissors and things, for I don't know where mine are. Glad I can't do
any more now! Being neat is such hard work!” and Molly threw herself
down on the rug beside the old wooden cradle in which Boo was blissfully
rocking, with a cargo of toys aboard.

She watched her time, and as soon as her father had done supper, she
hastened to say, before he got to his desk,--

“Please, papa, I want a dollar to get some brass buttons and things to
fix Boo's clothes with. He wore a hole in his new trousers coasting
down the Kembles' steps. And can't I wash him? He needs it, and Miss Bat
won't let me have a tub.”

“Certainly, child, certainly; do what you like, only don't keep me. I
must be off, or I shall miss Jackson, and he's the man I want;” and,
throwing down two dollars instead of one, Mr. Bemis hurried away, with a
vague impression that Boo had swallowed a dozen brass buttons, and Miss
Bat had been coasting somewhere in a bath-pan; but catching Jackson was
important, so he did not stop to investigate.

Armed with the paternal permission, Molly carried her point, and oh,
what a dreadful evening poor Boo spent! First, he was decoyed upstairs
an hour too soon, then put in a tub by main force and sternly scrubbed,
in spite of shrieks that brought Miss Bat to the locked door to condole
with the sufferer, scold the scrubber, and depart, darkly prophesying
croup before morning.

“He always howls when he is washed; but I shall do it, since you
won't, and he must get used to it. I will not have people tell me he's
neglected, if I can help it,” cried Molly, working away with tears in
her eyes--for it was as hard for her as for Boo; but she meant to be
thorough for once in her life, no matter what happened.

When the worst was over, she coaxed him with candy and stories till the
long task of combing out the curls was safely done; then, in the clean
night-gown with a blue button newly sewed on, she laid him in bed, worn
out, but sweet as a rose.

“Now, say your prayers, darling, and go to sleep with the nice red
blanket all tucked round so you won't get cold,” said Molly, rather
doubtful of the effect of the wet head.

“No, I won't! Going to sleep _now!_” and Boo shut his eyes wearily,
feeling that his late trials had not left him in a prayerful mood.

“Then you'll be a real little heathen, as Mrs. Pecq called you, and
I don't know what I shall do with you,” said Molly, longing to cuddle
rather than scold the little fellow, whose soul needed looking after as
well as his body.

“No, no; I won't be a heevin! I don't want to be frowed to the
trockindiles. I will say my prayers! oh, I will!” and, rising in
his bed, Boo did so, with the devotion of an infant Samuel, for he
remembered the talk when the society was formed.

Molly thought her labors were over for that night, and soon went to bed,
tired with her first attempts. But toward morning she was wakened by the
hoarse breathing of the boy, and was forced to patter away to Miss Bat's
room, humbly asking for the squills, and confessing that the prophecy
had come to pass.

“I knew it! Bring the child to me, and don't fret. I'll see to him, and
next time you do as I say,” was the consoling welcome she received as
the old lady popped up a sleepy but anxious face in a large flannel cap,
and shook the bottle with the air of a general who had routed the foe
before and meant to do it again.

Leaving her little responsibility in Miss Bat's arms, Molly retired
to wet her pillow with a few remorseful tears, and to fall asleep,
wondering if real missionaries ever killed their pupils in the process
of conversion.

So the girls all failed in the beginning; but they did not give up, and
succeeded better next time, as we shall see.




Chapter IX. The Debating Club


“Look here, old man, we ought to have a meeting. Holidays are over, and
we must brace up and attend to business,” said Frank to Gus, as they
strolled out of the schoolyard one afternoon in January, apparently
absorbed in conversation, but in reality waiting for a blue cloud and a
scarlet feather to appear on the steps.

“All right. When, where, and what?” asked Gus, who was a man of few
words.

“To-night, our house, subject, 'Shall girls go to college with us?'
Mother said we had better be making up our minds, because every one is
talking about it, and we shall have to be on one side or the other,
so we may as well settle it now,” answered Frank, for there was an
impression among the members that all vexed questions would be much
helped by the united eloquence and wisdom of the club.

“Very good; I'll pass the word and be there. Hullo, Neddy! The D.C.
meets to-night, at Minot's, seven sharp. Co-ed, &c.,” added Gus, losing
no time, as a third boy came briskly round the corner, with a little bag
in his hand.

“I'll come. Got home an hour earlier to-night, and thought I'd look
you up as I went by,” responded Ed Devlin, as he took possession of the
third post, with a glance toward the schoolhouse to see if a seal-skin
cap, with a long, yellow braid depending therefrom, was anywhere in
sight.

“Very good of you, I'm sure,” said Gus, ironically, not a bit deceived
by this polite attention.

“The longest way round is sometimes the shortest way home, hey, Ed?” and
Frank gave him a playful poke that nearly sent him off his perch.

Then they all laughed at some joke of their own, and Gus added, “No
girls coming to hear us to-night. Don't think it, my son.

“More's the pity,” and Ed shook his head regretfully over the downfall
of his hopes.

“Can't help it; the other fellows say they spoil the fun, so we have
to give in, sometimes, for the sake of peace and quietness. Don't
mind having them a bit myself,” said Frank, in such a tone of cheerful
resignation that they laughed again, for the “Triangle,” as the three
chums were called, always made merry music.

“We must have a game party next week. The girls like that, and so do
I,” candidly observed Gus, whose pleasant parlors were the scene of many
such frolics.

“And so do your sisters and your cousins and your aunts,” hummed Ed,
for Gus was often called Admiral because he really did possess three
sisters, two cousins, and four aunts, besides mother and grandmother,
all living in the big house together.

The boys promptly joined in the popular chorus, and other voices all
about the yard took it up, for the “Pinafore” epidemic raged fearfully
in Harmony Village that winter.

“How's business?” asked Gus, when the song ended, for Ed had not
returned to school in the autumn, but had gone into a store in the city.

“Dull; things will look up toward spring, they say. I get on well
enough, but I miss you fellows dreadfully;” and Ed put a hand on the
broad shoulder of each friend, as if he longed to be a school-boy again.

“Better give it up and go to college with me next year,” said Frank, who
was preparing for Boston University, while Gus fitted for Harvard.

“No; I've chosen business, and I mean to stick to it, so don't you
unsettle my mind. Have you practised that March?” asked Ed, turning to a
gayer subject, for he had his little troubles, but always looked on the
bright side of things.

“Skating is so good, I don't get much time. Come early, and we'll have a
turn at it.”

“I will. Must run home now.”

“Pretty cold loafing here.”

“Mail is in by this time.”

And with these artless excuses the three boys leaped off the posts, as
if one spring moved them, as a group of girls came chattering down the
path. The blue cloud floated away beside Frank, the scarlet feather
marched off with the Admiral, while the fur cap nodded to the gray hat
as two happy faces smiled at each other.

The same thing often happened, for twice a-day the streets were full
of young couples walking to and from school together, smiled at by the
elders, and laughed at by the less susceptible boys and girls, who went
alone or trooped along in noisy groups. The prudent mothers had tried to
stop this guileless custom, but found it very difficult, as the fathers
usually sympathized with their sons, and dismissed the matter with the
comfortable phrase, “Never mind; boys will be boys.” “Not forever,”
 returned the anxious mammas, seeing the tall lads daily grow more manly,
and the pretty daughters fast learning to look demure when certain names
were mentioned.

It could not be stopped without great parental sternness and the danger
of deceit, for co-education will go on outside of school if not inside,
and the safest way is to let sentiment and study go hand in hand, with
teachers and parents to direct and explain the great lesson all are
the better for learning soon or late. So the elders had to give in,
acknowledging that this sudden readiness to go to school was a comfort,
that the new sort of gentle emulation worked wonders in lazy girls and
boys, and that watching these “primrose friendships” bud, blossom,
and die painless deaths, gave a little touch of romance to their own
work-a-day lives.

“On the whole I'd rather have my sons walking, playing, and studying
with bright, well-mannered girls, than always knocking about with rough
boys,” said Mrs. Minot at one of the Mothers' Meetings, where the good
ladies met to talk over their children, and help one another to do their
duty by them.

“I find that Gus is more gentle with his sisters since Juliet took him
in hand, for he wants to stand well with her, and they report him if he
troubles them. I really see no harm in the little friendship, though I
never had any such when I was a girl,” said Mrs. Burton, who adored her
one boy and was his confidante.

“My Merry seems to be contented with her brothers so far, but I
shouldn't wonder if I had my hands full by and by,” added Mrs. Grant,
who already foresaw that her sweet little daughter would be sought after
as soon as she should lengthen her skirts and turn up her bonny brown
hair.

Molly Loo had no mother to say a word for her, but she settled matters
for herself by holding fast to Merry, and declaring that she would have
no escort but faithful Boo.

It is necessary to dwell a moment upon this new amusement, because it
was not peculiar to Harmony Village, but appears everywhere as naturally
as the game parties and croquet which have taken the place of the
husking frolics and apple-bees of olden times, and it is impossible to
dodge the subject if one attempts to write of boys and girls as they
really are nowadays.

“Here, my hero, see how you like this. If it suits, you will be ready to
march as soon as the doctor gives the word,” said Ralph, coming into the
Bird Room that evening with a neat little crutch under his arm.

“Ha, ha, that looks fine! I'd like to try it right off, but I won't till
I get leave. Did you make it yourself, Ral?” asked Jack, handling it
with delight, as he sat bolt upright, with his leg on a rest, for he was
getting on capitally now.

“Mostly. Rather a neat job, I flatter myself.”

“I should say so. What a clever fellow you are! Any new inventions
lately?” asked Frank, coming up to examine and admire.

“Only an anti-snoring machine and an elbow-pad,” answered Ralph, with a
twinkle in his eye, as if reminded of something funny.

“Go on, and tell about them. I never heard of an anti-snorer. Jack
better have one,” said Frank, interested at once.

“Well, a rich old lady kept her family awake with that lively music, so
she sent to Shirtman and Codleff for something to stop it. They thought
it was a good joke, and told me to see what I could do. I thought it
over, and got up the nicest little affair you ever saw. It went over the
mouth, and had a tube to fit the ear, so when the lady snored she woke
herself up and stopped it. It suited exactly. I think of taking out a
patent,” concluded Ralph, joining in the boys' laugh at the droll idea.

“What was the pad?” asked Frank, returning to the small model of an
engine he was making.

“Oh, that was a mere trifle for a man who had a tender elbow-joint and
wanted something to protect it. I made a little pad to fit on, and his
crazy-bone was safe.”

“I planned to have you make me a new leg if this one was spoilt,” said
Jack, sure that his friend could invent anything under the sun.

“I'd do my best for you. I made a hand for a fellow once, and that
got me my place, you know,” answered Ralph, who thought little of such
mechanical trifles, and longed to be painting portraits or modelling
busts, being an artist as well as an inventor.

Here Gus, Ed, and several other boys came in, and the conversation
became general. Grif, Chick, and Brickbat were three young gentlemen
whose own respectable names were usually ignored, and they cheerfully
answered to these nicknames.

As the clock struck seven, Frank, who ruled the club with a rod of iron
when Chairman, took his place behind the study table. Seats stood about
it, and a large, shabby book lay before Gus, who was Secretary, and kept
the records with a lavish expenditure of ink, to judge by the blots. The
members took their seats, and nearly all tilted back their chairs and
put their hands in their pockets, to keep them out of mischief; for, as
every one knows, it is impossible for two lads to be near each other
and refrain from tickling or pinching. Frank gave three raps with an old
croquet-mallet set on a short handle, and with much dignity opened the
meeting.

“Gentlemen, the business of the club will be attended to, and then
we will discuss the question, 'Shall girls go to our colleges?' The
Secretary will now read the report of the last meeting.”

Clearing his throat, Gus read the following brief and elegant report:--

“Club met, December 18th, at the house of G. Burton, Esq. Subject: 'Is
summer or winter best fun?' A lively pow-wow. About evenly divided.
J. Flint fined five cents for disrespect to the Chair. A collection of
forty cents taken up to pay for breaking a pane of glass during a free
fight of the members on the door-step. E. Devlin was chosen Secretary
for the coming year, and a new book contributed by the Chairman.”

“That's all.”

“Is there any other business before the meeting?” asked Frank, as the
reader closed the old book with a slam and shoved the new one across the
table.

Ed rose, and glancing about him with an appealing look, said, as if sure
his proposition would not be well received, “I wish to propose the name
of a new member. Bob Walker wants to join, and I think we ought to let
him. He is trying to behave well, and I am sure we could help him. Can't
we?”

All the boys looked sober, and Joe, otherwise Brickbat, said, bluntly,
“I won't. He's a bad lot, and we don't want any such here. Let him go
with chaps of his own sort.”

“That is just what I want to keep him from! He's a good-hearted boy
enough, only no one looks after him; so he gets into scrapes, as we
should, if we were in his place, I dare say. He wants to come here, and
would be so proud if he was let in, I know he'd behave. Come now, let's
give him a chance,” and Ed looked at Gus and Frank, sure that if they
stood by him he should carry his point.

But Gus shook his head, as if doubtful of the wisdom of the plan, and
Frank said gravely: “You know we made the rule that the number should
never be over eight, and we cannot break it.”

“You needn't. I can't be here half the time, so I will resign and let
Bob have my place,” began Ed, but he was silenced by shouts of “No, no,
you shan't!” “We won't let you off!” “Club would go to smash, if you
back out!”

“Let him have my place; I'm the youngest, and you won't miss me,” cried
Jack, bound to stand by Ed at all costs.

“We might do that,” said Frank, who did object to small boys, though
willing to admit this particular one.

“Better make a new rule to have ten members, and admit both Bob and Tom
Grant,” said Ralph, whereat Grif grinned and Joe scowled, for one lad
liked Merry's big brother and the other did not.

“That's a good idea! Put it to vote,” said Gus, too kind-hearted to shut
the door on any one.

“First I want to ask if all you fellows are ready to stand by Bob, out
of the club as well as in, for it won't do much good to be kind to him
here and cut him at school and in the street,” said Ed, heartily in
earnest about the matter.

“I will!” cried Jack, ready to follow where his beloved friend led, and
the others nodded, unwilling to be outdone by the youngest member.

“Good! With all of us to lend a hand, we can do a great deal; and I tell
you, boys, it is time, if we want to keep poor Bob straight. We all turn
our backs on him, so he loafs round the tavern, and goes with fellows
we don't care to know. But he isn't bad yet, and we can keep him up, I'm
sure, if we just try. I hope to get him into the Lodge, and that will be
half the battle, won't it, Frank?” added Ed, sure that this suggestion
would have weight with the honorable Chairman.

“Bring him along; I'm with you!” answered Frank, making up his mind at
once, for he had joined the Temperance Lodge four years ago, and already
six boys had followed his example.

“He is learning to smoke, but we'll make him drop it before it leads
to worse. You can help him there, Admiral, if you only will,” added Ed,
giving a grateful look at one friend, and turning to the other.

“I'm your man;” and Gus looked as if he knew what he promised, for he
had given up smoking to oblige his father, and kept his word like a
hero.

“You other fellows can do a good deal by just being kind and not
twitting him with old scrapes, and I'll do anything I can for you all
to pay for this;” and Ed sat down with a beaming smile, feeling that his
cause was won.

The vote was taken, and all hands went up, for even surly Joe gave in;
so Bob and Tom were duly elected, and proved their gratitude for the
honor done them by becoming worthy members of the club. It was only
boys' play now, but the kind heart and pure instincts of one lad showed
the others how to lend a helping hand to a comrade in danger, and win
him away from temptation to the safer pastimes of their more guarded
lives.

Well pleased with themselves--for every genuine act or word, no matter
how trifling it seems, leaves a sweet and strengthening influence
behind--the members settled down to the debate, which was never very
long, and often only an excuse for fun of all sorts.

“Ralph, Gus, and Ed are for, and Brickbat, Grif, and Chick against, I
suppose?” said Frank, surveying his company like a general preparing for
battle.

“No, sir! I believe in co-everything!” cried Chick, a mild youth, who
loyally escorted a chosen damsel home from school every day.

A laugh greeted this bold declaration, and Chick sat down, red but firm.

“I'll speak for two since the Chairman can't, and Jack won't go against
those who pet him most to death,” said Joe, who, not being a favorite
with the girls, considered them a nuisance and lost no opportunity of
telling them so.

“Fire away, then, since you are up;” commanded Frank.

“Well,” began Joe, feeling too late how much he had undertaken, “I don't
know a great deal about it, and I don't care, but I do _not_ believe in
having girls at college. They don't belong there, nobody wants 'em, and
they'd better be at home darning their stockings.”

“Yours, too,” put in Ralph, who had heard that argument so often he was
tired of it.

“Of course; that's what girls are for. I don't mind 'em at school,
but I'd just as soon they had a room to themselves. We should get on
better.”

“_You_ would if Mabel wasn't in your class and always ahead of you,”
 observed Ed, whose friend was a fine scholar, and he very proud of the
fact.

“Look here, if you fellows keep interrupting, I won't sit down for half
an hour,” said Joe, well knowing that eloquence was not his gift, but
bound to have his say out.

Deep silence reigned, for that threat quelled the most impatient member,
and Joe prosed on, using all the arguments he had ever heard, and
paying off several old scores by sly hits of a personal nature, as older
orators often do.

“It is clear to my mind that boys would get on better without any
girls fooling round. As for their being as smart as we are, it is all
nonsense, for some of 'em cry over their lessons every day, or go home
with headaches, or get mad and scold all recess, because something
'isn't fair.' No, sir; girls ain't meant to know much, and they can't.
Wise folks say so and I believe 'em. Haven't got any sisters myself, and
I don't want any, for they don't seem to amount to much, according to
those who do have 'em.”

Groans from Gus and Ed greeted the closing remarks of the ungallant Joe,
who sat down, feeling that he had made somebody squirm. Up jumped Grif,
the delight of whose life was practical jokes, which amiable weakness
made him the terror of the girls, though they had no other fault to find
with the merry lad.

“Mr. Chairman, the ground I take is this: girls have not the strength to
go to college with us. They couldn't row a race, go on a lark, or take
care of themselves, as we do. They are all well enough at home, and I
like them at parties, but for real fun and go I wouldn't give a cent for
them,” began Grif, whose views of a collegiate life were confined to the
enjoyments rather than the studies of that festive period. “I have tried
them, and they can't stand anything. They scream if you tell them there
is a mouse in the room, and run if they see a big dog. I just put a
cockroach in Molly's desk one day, and when she opened it she jumped as
if she was shot.”

So did the gentlemen of the club, for at that moment half-a-dozen
fire-crackers exploded under the chair Grif had left, and flew wildly
about the room. Order was with difficulty restored, the mischievous
party summarily chastised and commanded to hold his tongue, under
penalty of ejectment from the room if he spoke again. Firmly grasping
that red and unruly member, Grif composed himself to listen, with his
nose in the air and his eyes shining like black beads.

Ed was always the peace-maker, and now, when he rose with his engaging
smile, his voice fell like oil upon the troubled waters, and his bright
face was full of the becoming bashfulness which afflicts youths of
seventeen when touching upon such subjects of newly acquired interest as
girls and their pleasant but perplexing ways.

“It seems to me we have hardly considered the matter enough to be able
to say much. But I think that school would be awfully dry and dismal
without--ahem!--any young ladies to make it nice. I wouldn't give a pin
to go if there was only a crowd of fellows, though I like a good game
as well as any man. I pity any boy who has no sisters,” continued Ed,
warming up as he thought of his own, who loved him dearly, as well they
might, for a better brother never lived. “Home wouldn't be worth having
without them to look after a fellow, to keep him out of scrapes, help
him with his lessons, and make things jolly for his friends. I tell you
we can't do without girls, and I'm not ashamed to say that I think the
more we see of them, and try to be like them in many ways, the better
men we shall be by and by.”

“Hear! hear!” cried Frank, in his deepest tone, for he heartily agreed
to that, having talked the matter over with his mother, and received
much light upon things which should always be set right in young heads
and hearts. And who can do this so wisely and well as mothers, if they
only will?

Feeling that his sentiments had been approved, and he need not be
ashamed of the honest color in his cheeks, Ed sat down amid the applause
of his side, especially of Jack, who pounded so vigorously with his
crutch that Mrs. Pecq popped in her head to see if anything was wanted.

“No, thank you, ma'am, we were only cheering Ed,” said Gus, now upon
his legs, and rather at a loss what to say till Mrs. Pecq's appearance
suggested an idea, and he seized upon it.

“My honored friend has spoken so well that I have little to add. I agree
with him, and if you want an example of what girls _can_ do, why, look
at Jill. She's young, I know, but a first-rate scholar for her age. As
for pluck, she is as brave as a boy, and almost as smart at running,
rowing, and so on. Of course, she can't play ball--no girl can; their
arms are not made right to throw--but she can catch remarkably well.
I'll say that for her. Now, if she and Mabel--and--and--some others I
could name, are so clever and strong at the beginning, I don't see why
they shouldn't keep up and go along with us all through. I'm willing,
and will do what I can to help other fellows' sisters as I'd like to
have them help mine. And I'll punch their heads if they don't;” and Gus
subsided, assured, by a burst of applause, that his manly way of stating
the case met with general approval.

“We shall be happy to hear from our senior member if he will honor us
with a few remarks,” said Frank, with a bow to Ralph.

No one ever knew whom he would choose to personate, for he never spoke
in his own character. Now he rose slowly, put one hand in his bosom, and
fixing his eye sternly on Grif, who was doing something suspicious with
a pin, gave them a touch of Sergeant Buzfuz, from the Pickwick trial,
thinking that the debate was not likely to throw much light on the
subject under discussion. In the midst of this appeal to “Me lud and
gentlemen of the jury,” he suddenly paused, smoothed his hair down upon
his forehead, rolled up his eyes, and folding his hands, droned out Mr.
Chadband's sermon on Peace, delivered over poor Jo, and ending with the
famous lines:--

  “Oh, running stream of sparkling joy,
  To be a glorious human boy!”

Then, setting his hair erect with one comprehensive sweep, he caught up
his coat-skirts over his arm, and, assuming a parliamentary attitude,
burst into a comical medley, composed of extracts from Jefferson Brick's
and Lafayette Kettle's speeches, and Elijah Pogram's Defiance, from
“Martin Chuzzlewit.” Gazing at Gus, who was convulsed with suppressed
merriment, he thundered forth:--

“In the name of our common country, sir, in the name of that righteous
cause in which we are jined, and in the name of the star-spangled
banner, I thank you for your eloquent and categorical remarks. You, sir,
are a model of a man fresh from Natur's mould. A true-born child of
this free hemisphere; verdant as the mountains of our land; bright and
flowin' as our mineral Licks; unspiled by fashion as air our boundless
perearers. Rough you may be; so air our Barrs. Wild you may be; so air
our Buffalers. But, sir, you air a Child of Freedom, and your proud
answer to the Tyrant is, that your bright home is in the Settin' Sun.
And, sir, if any man denies this fact, though it be the British Lion
himself, I defy him. Let me have him here!”--smiting the table, and
causing the inkstand to skip--“here, upon this sacred altar! Here, upon
the ancestral ashes cemented with the glorious blood poured out like
water on the plains of Chickabiddy Lick. Alone I dare that Lion, and
tell him that Freedom's hand once twisted in his mane, he rolls a corse
before me, and the Eagles of the Great Republic scream, Ha, ha!”

By this time the boys were rolling about in fits of laughter; even sober
Frank was red and breathless, and Jack lay back, feebly squealing, as he
could laugh no more. In a moment Ralph was as meek as a Quaker, and
sat looking about him with a mildly astonished air, as if inquiring the
cause of such unseemly mirth. A knock at the door produced a lull, and
in came a maid with apples.

“Time's up; fall to and make yourselves comfortable,” was the summary
way in which the club was released from its sterner duties and permitted
to unbend its mighty mind for a social half-hour, chiefly devoted to
whist, with an Indian war-dance as a closing ceremony.




Chapter X. The Dramatic Club


While Jack was hopping gayly about on his crutches, poor Jill was
feeling the effects of her second fall, and instead of sitting up, as
she hoped to do after six weeks of rest, she was ordered to lie on a
board for two hours each day. Not an easy penance, by any means, for the
board was very hard, and she could do nothing while she lay there, as it
did not slope enough to permit her to read without great fatigue of both
eyes and hands. So the little martyr spent her first hour of trial in
sobbing, the second in singing, for just as her mother and Mrs. Minot
were deciding in despair that neither she nor they could bear it, Jill
suddenly broke out into a merry chorus she used to hear her father
sing:--

  “Faut jouer le mirliton,
  Faut jouer le mirlitir,
  Faut jouer le mirliter,
  Mir--li--ton.”

The sound of the brave little voice was very comforting to the two
mothers hovering about her, and Jack said, with a look of mingled pity
and admiration, as he brandished his crutch over the imaginary foes,--

“That's right! Sing away, and we'll play you are an Indian captive being
tormented by your enemies, and too proud to complain. I'll watch the
clock, and the minute time is up I'll rush in and rescue you.”

Jill laughed, but the fancy pleased her, and she straightened herself
out under the gay afghan, while she sang, in a plaintive voice, another
little French song her father taught her:--

  “J'avais une colombe blanche,
  J'avais un blanc petit pigeon,
  Tous deux volaient, de branche en branche,
  Jusqu'au faîte de mon dongeon:
  Mais comme un coup de vent d'automne,
  S'est abattu là, l'épervier,
  Et ma colombe si mignonne
  Ne revient plus au colombier.”

“My poor Jean had a fine voice, and always hoped the child would take
after him. It would break his heart to see her lying there trying to
cheer her pain with the songs he used to sing her to sleep with,” said
Mrs. Pecq, sadly.

“She really has a great deal of talent, and when she is able she shall
have some lessons, for music is a comfort and a pleasure, sick or well,”
 answered Mrs. Minot, who had often admired the fresh voice, with its
pretty accent.

Here Jill began the Canadian boat-song, with great vigor, as if bound to
play her part of Indian victim with spirit, and not disgrace herself by
any more crying. All knew the air, and joined in, especially Jack, who
came out strong on the “Row, brothers, row,” but ended in a squeak on a
high note, so drolly, that the rest broke down. So the hour that began
with tears ended with music and laughter, and a new pleasure to think of
for the future.

After that day Jill exerted all her fortitude, for she liked to have the
boys call her brave and admire the cheerful way in which she endured two
hours of discomfort. She found she could use her zither as it lay upon
her breast, and every day the pretty music began at a certain hour, and
all in the house soon learned to love and listen for it. Even the old
cook set open her kitchen door, saying pitifully, “Poor darlint, hear
how purty she's singin', wid the pain, on that crewel boord. It's a
little saint, she is. May her bed above be aisy!”

Frank would lift her gently on and off, with a kind word that comforted
her immensely, and gentle Ed would come and teach her new bits of music,
while the other fellows were frolicking below. Ralph added his share to
her amusement, for he asked leave to model her head in clay, and set up
his work in a corner, coming to pat, scrape, and mould whenever he had
a spare minute, amusing her by his lively chat, and showing her how to
shape birds, rabbits, and queer faces in the soft clay, when the songs
were all sung and her fingers tired of the zither.

The girls sympathized very heartily with her new trial, and brought
all manner of gifts to cheer her captivity. Merry and Molly made a
gay screen by pasting pictures on the black cambric which covered the
folding frame that stood before her to keep the draughts from her as she
lay on her board. Bright birds and flowers, figures and animals, covered
one side, and on the other they put mottoes, bits of poetry, anecdotes,
and short stories, so that Jill could lie and look or read without the
trouble of holding a book. It was not all done at once, but grew slowly,
and was a source of instruction as well as amusement to them all, as
they read carefully, that they might make good selections.

But the thing that pleased Jill most was something Jack did, for he gave
up going to school, and stayed at home nearly a fortnight after he might
have gone, all for her sake. The day the doctor said he might try it
if he would be very careful, he was in great spirits, and limped about,
looking up his books, and planning how he would astonish his mates by
the rapidity of his recovery. When he sat down to rest he remembered
Jill, who had been lying quietly behind the screen, while he talked with
his mother, busy putting fresh covers on the books.

“She is so still, I guess she is asleep,” thought Jack, peeping round
the corner.

No, not asleep, but lying with her eyes fixed on the sunny window,
beyond which the bright winter world sparkled after a fresh snow-fall.
The jingle of sleigh-bells could be heard, the laughter of boys and
girls on their way to school, all the pleasant stir of a new day of
happy work and play for the rest of the world, more lonely, quiet, and
wearisome than ever to her since her friend and fellow-prisoner was set
free and going to leave her.

Jack understood that patient, wistful look, and, without a word, went
back to his seat, staring at the fire so soberly, that his mother
presently asked: “What are you thinking of so busily, with that pucker
in your forehead?”

“I've about made up my mind that I won't go to school just yet,”
 answered Jack, slowly lifting his head, for it cost him something to
give up the long-expected pleasure.

“Why not?” and Mrs. Minot looked much surprised, till Jack pointed to
the screen, and, making a sad face to express Jill's anguish, answered
in a cheerful tone, “Well, I'm not sure that it is best. Doctor did not
want me to go, but said I might because I teased. I shall be sure to
come to grief, and then every one will say, 'I told you so,' and that is
so provoking. I'd rather keep still a week longer. Hadn't I better?”

His mother smiled and nodded as she said, sewing away at much-abused old
Caesar, as if she loved him, “Do as you think best, dear. I always want
you at home, but I don't wonder you are rather tired of it after this
long confinement.”

“I say, Jill, should I be in your way if I didn't go to school till the
first of February?” called Jack, laughing to himself at the absurdity of
the question.

“Not much!” answered a glad voice from behind the screen, and he knew
the sorrowful eyes were shining with delight, though he could not see
them.

“Well, I guess I may as well, and get quite firm on my legs before I
start. Another week or so will bring me up if I study hard, so I shall
not lose my time. I'll tackle my Latin as soon as it's ready, mother.”

Jack got a hearty kiss with the neatly covered book, and Mamma loved him
for the little sacrifice more than if he had won a prize at school. He
did get a reward, for, in five minutes from the time he decided, Jill
was singing like a bobolink, and such a medley of merry music came from
behind the screen, that it was a regular morning concert. She did not
know then that he stayed for her sake, but she found it out soon after,
and when the time came did as much for him, as we shall see.

It proved a wise decision, for the last part of January was so stormy
Jack could not have gone half the time. So, while the snow drifted, and
bitter winds raged, he sat snugly at home amusing Jill, and getting on
bravely with his lessons, for Frank took great pains with him to show
his approbation of the little kindness, and, somehow, the memory of it
seemed to make even the detested Latin easier.

With February fair weather set in, and Jack marched happily away to
school, with Jill's new mittens on his hands, Mamma nodding from the
door-step, and Frank ready to give him a lift on the new sled, if the
way proved too long or too rough.

“I shall not have time to miss him now, for we are to be very busy
getting ready for the Twenty-second. The Dramatic Club meets to-night,
and would like to come here, if they may, so I can help?” said Jill, as
Mrs. Minot came up, expecting to find her rather low in her mind.

“Certainly; and I have a basket of old finery I looked up for the club
when I was rummaging out bits of silk for your blue quilt,” answered
the good lady, who had set up a new employment to beguile the hours of
Jack's absence.

When the girls arrived, that evening, they found Mrs. Chairwoman
surrounded by a strew of theatrical properties, enjoying herself very
much. All brought such contributions as they could muster, and all were
eager about a certain tableau which was to be the gem of the whole, they
thought. Jill, of course, was not expected to take any part, but her
taste was good, so all consulted her as they showed their old silks,
laces, and flowers, asking who should be this, and who that. All wanted
to be the “Sleeping Beauty,” for that was the chosen scene, with the
slumbering court about the princess, and the prince in the act of
awakening her. Jack was to be the hero, brave in his mother's velvet
cape, red boots, and a real sword, while the other boys were to have
parts of more or less splendor.

“Mabel should be the Beauty, because her hair is so lovely,” said
Juliet, who was quite satisfied with her own part of the Queen.

“No, Merry ought to have it, as she is the prettiest, and has that
splendid veil to wear,” answered Molly, who was to be the maid of honor,
cuffing the little page, Boo.

“I don't care a bit, but my feather would be fine for the Princess, and
I don't know as Emma would like to have me lend it to any one else,”
 said Annette, waving a long white plume over her head, with girlish
delight in its grace.

“I should think the white silk dress, the veil, and the feather ought to
go together, with the scarlet crape shawl and these pearls. That would
be sweet, and just what princesses really wear,” advised Jill, who was
stringing a quantity of old Roman pearls.

“We all want to wear the nice things, so let us draw lots. Wouldn't
that be the fairest way?” asked Merry, looking like a rosy little bride,
under a great piece of illusion, which had done duty in many plays.

“The Prince is light, so the Princess must be darkish. We ought to
choose the girl who will look best, as it is a picture. I heard Miss
Delano say so, when the ladies got up the tableaux, last winter, and
every one wanted to be Cleopatra,” said Jill decidedly.

“You choose, and then if we can't agree we will draw lots,” proposed
Susy, who, being plain, knew there was little hope of her getting a
chance in any other way.

So all stood in a row, and Jill, from her sofa, surveyed them
critically, feeling that the one Jack would really prefer was not among
the number.

“I choose that one, for Juliet wants to be Queen, Molly would make
faces, and the others are too big or too light,” pronounced Jill,
pointing to Merry, who looked pleased, while Mabel's face darkened, and
Susy gave a disdainful sniff.

“You'd better draw lots, and then there will be no fuss. Ju and I
are out of the fight, but you three can try, and let this settle the
matter,” said Molly, handing Jill a long strip of paper.

All agreed to let it be so, and when the bits were ready drew in turn.
This time fate was evidently on Merry's side, and no one grumbled when
she showed the longest paper.

“Go and dress, then come back, and we'll plan how we are to be placed
before we call up the boys,” commanded Jill, who was manager, since she
could be nothing else.

The girls retired to the bedroom and began to “rig up,” as they called
it; but discontent still lurked among them, and showed itself in sharp
words, envious looks, and disobliging acts.

“Am I to have the white silk and the feather?” asked Merry, delighted
with the silvery shimmer of the one and the graceful droop of the other,
though both were rather shabby.

“You can use your own dress. I don't see why you should have
everything,” answered Susy, who was at the mirror, putting a wreath of
scarlet flowers on her red head, bound to be gay since she could not be
pretty.

“I think I'd better keep the plume, as I haven't anything else that is
nice, and I'm afraid Emma wouldn't like me to lend it,” added Annette,
who was disappointed that Mabel was not to be the Beauty.

“_I_ don't intend to act at all!” declared Mabel, beginning to braid up
her hair with a jerk, out of humor with the whole affair.

“_I_ think you are a set of cross, selfish girls to back out and keep
your nice things just because you can't _all_ have the best part.
I'm ashamed of you!” scolded Molly, standing by Merry, who was sadly
surveying her mother's old purple silk, which looked like brown in the
evening.

“I'm going to have Miss Delano's red brocade for the Queen, and I shall
ask her for the yellow-satin dress for Merry when I go to get mine, and
tell her how mean you are,” said Juliet, frowning under her gilt-paper
crown as she swept about in a red table-cloth for train till the brocade
arrived.

“Perhaps you'd like to have Mabel cut her hair off, so Merry can have
that, too?” cried Susy, with whom hair was a tender point.

“Light hair isn't wanted, so Ju will have to give hers, or you'd better
borrow Miss Bat's frisette,” added Mabel, with a scornful laugh.

“I just wish Miss Bat was here to give you girls a good shaking. Do let
someone else have a chance at the glass, you peacock!” exclaimed Molly
Loo, pushing Susy aside to arrange her own blue turban, out of which she
plucked the pink pompon to give Merry.

“Don't quarrel about me. I shall do well enough, and the scarlet shawl
will hide my ugly dress,” said Merry, from the corner, where she sat
waiting for her turn at the mirror.

As she spoke of the shawl her eye went in search of it, and something
that she saw in the other room put her own disappointment out of her
head. Jill lay there all alone, rather tired with the lively chatter,
and the effort it cost her not to repine at being shut out from the
great delight of dressing up and acting.

Her eyes were closed, her net was off, and all the pretty black curls
lay about her shoulders as one hand idly pulled them out, while the
other rested on the red shawl, as if she loved its glowing color and
soft texture. She was humming to herself the little song of the dove and
the donjon, and something in the plaintive voice, the solitary figure,
went straight to Merry's gentle heart.

“Poor Jilly can't have any of the fun,” was the first thought; then came
a second, that made Merry start and smile, and in a minute whisper
so that all but Jill could hear her, “Girls, I'm not going to be the
Princess. But I've thought of a splendid one!”

“Who?” asked the rest, staring at one another, much surprised by this
sudden announcement.

“Hush! Speak low, or you will spoil it all. Look in the Bird Room, and
tell me if that isn't a prettier Princess than I could make?”

They all looked, but no one spoke, and Merry added, with sweet
eagerness, “It is the only thing poor Jill can be, and it would make
her so happy; Jack would like it, and it would please every one, I know.
Perhaps she will never walk again, so we ought to be very good to her,
poor dear.”

The last words, whispered with a little quiver in the voice, settled
the matter better than hours of talking, for girls are tender-hearted
creatures, and not one of these but would have gladly given all the
pretty things she owned to see Jill dancing about well and strong again.
Like a ray of sunshine the kind thought touched and brightened every
face; envy, impatience, vanity, and discontent flew away like imps at
the coming of the good fairy, and with one accord they all cried,--

“It will be lovely; let us go and tell her!”

Forgetting their own adornment, out they trooped after Merry, who ran
to the sofa, saying, with a smile which was reflected in all the other
faces, “Jill, dear, we have chosen another Princess, and I know you'll
like her.”

“Who is it?” asked Jill, languidly, opening her eyes without the least
suspicion of the truth.

“I'll show you;” and taking the cherished veil from her own head, Merry
dropped it like a soft cloud over Jill; Annette added the long plume,
Susy laid the white silk dress about her, while Juliet and Mabel lifted
the scarlet shawl to spread it over the foot of the sofa, and Molly tore
the last ornament from her turban, a silver star, to shine on Jill's
breast. Then they all took hands and danced round the couch, singing, as
they laughed at her astonishment, “There she is! There she is! Princess
Jill as fine as you please!

“Do you really mean it? But can I? Is it fair? How sweet of you! Come
here and let me hug you all!” cried Jill, in a rapture at the surprise,
and the pretty way in which it was done.

The grand scene on the Twenty-second was very fine, indeed; but the
little tableau of that minute was infinitely better, though no one saw
it, as Jill tried to gather them all in her arms, for that nosegay of
girlish faces was the sweeter, because each one had sacrificed her own
little vanity to please a friend, and her joy was reflected in the eyes
that sparkled round the happy Princess.

“Oh, you dear, kind things, to think of me and give me all your best
clothes! I never shall forget it, and I'll do anything for you. Yes!
I'll write and ask Mrs. Piper to lend us her ermine cloak for the king.
See if I don't!”

Shrieks of delight hailed this noble offer, for no one had dared to
borrow the much-coveted mantle, but all agreed that the old lady would
not refuse Jill. It was astonishing how smoothly everything went
after this, for each was eager to help, admire, and suggest, in the
friendliest way; and when all were dressed, the boys found a party
of very gay ladies waiting for them round the couch, where lay the
brightest little Princess ever seen.

“Oh, Jack, I'm to act! Wasn't it dear of the girls to choose me? Don't
they look lovely? Aren't you glad?” cried Jill, as the lads stared and
the lasses blushed and smiled, well pleased at the frank admiration the
boyish faces showed.

“I guess I am! You are a set of trumps, and we'll give you a first-class
spread after the play to pay for it. Won't we, fellows?” answered
Jack, much gratified, and feeling that now he could act his own part
capitally.

“We will. It was a handsome thing to do, and we think well of you for
it. Hey, Gus?” and Frank nodded approvingly at all, though he looked
only at Annette.

“As king of this crowd, I call it to order,” said Gus, retiring to the
throne, where Juliet sat laughing in her red table-cloth.

“We'll have 'The Fair One with Golden Locks' next time; I promise you
that,” whispered Ed to Mabel, whose shining hair streamed over her blue
dress like a mantle of gold-colored silk.

“Girls are pretty nice things, aren't they? Kind of 'em to take Jill
in. Don't Molly look fine, though?” and Grif's black eyes twinkled as he
planned to pin her skirts to Merry's at the first opportunity.

“Susy looks as gay as a feather-duster. I like her. She never snubs a
fellow,” said Joe, much impressed with the splendor of the court ladies.

The boys' costumes were not yet ready, but they posed well, and all had
a merry time, ending with a game of blind-man's-buff, in which every one
caught the right person in the most singular way, and all agreed as they
went home in the moonlight that it had been an unusually jolly meeting.

So the fairy play woke the sleeping beauty that lies in all of us, and
makes us lovely when we rouse it with a kiss of unselfish good-will,
for, though the girls did not know it then, they had adorned themselves
with pearls more precious than the waxen ones they decked their Princess
in.




Chapter XI. “Down Brakes”


The greatest people have their weak points, and the best-behaved boys
now and then yield to temptation and get into trouble, as everybody
knows. Frank was considered a remarkably well-bred and proper lad, and
rather prided himself on his good reputation, for he never got into
scrapes like the other fellows. Well, hardly ever, for we must confess
that at rare intervals his besetting sin overcame his prudence, and he
proved himself an erring, human boy. Steam-engines had been his idols
for years, and they alone could lure him from the path of virtue. Once,
in trying to investigate the mechanism of a toy specimen, which had its
little boiler and ran about whistling and puffing in the most delightful
way, he nearly set the house afire by the sparks that dropped on the
straw carpet. Another time, in trying experiments with the kitchen
tea-kettle, he blew himself up, and the scars of that explosion he still
carried on his hands.

He was long past such childish amusements now, but his favorite haunt
was the engine-house of the new railroad, where he observed the habits
of his pets with never-failing interest, and cultivated the good-will
of stokers and brakemen till they allowed him many liberties, and were
rather flattered by the admiration expressed for their iron horses by a
young gentleman who liked them better even than his Greek and Latin.

There was not much business doing on this road as yet, and the two
cars of the passenger-trains were often nearly empty, though full
freight-trains rolled from the factory to the main road, of which this
was only a branch. So things went on in a leisurely manner, which gave
Frank many opportunities of pursuing his favorite pastime. He soon knew
all about No. 11, his pet engine, and had several rides on it with Bill,
the engineer, so that he felt at home there, and privately resolved that
when he was a rich man he would have a road of his own, and run trains
as often as he liked.

Gus took less interest than his friend in the study of steam, but
usually accompanied him when he went over after school to disport
himself in the engine-house, interview the stoker, or see if there was
anything new in the way of brakes.

One afternoon they found No. 11 on the side-track, puffing away as if
enjoying a quiet smoke before starting. No cars were attached, and no
driver was to be seen, for Bill was off with the other men behind the
station-house, helping the expressman, whose horse had backed down a
bank and upset the wagon.

“Good chance for a look at the old lady,” said Frank, speaking of the
engine as Bill did, and jumping aboard with great satisfaction, followed
by Gus.

“I'd give ten dollars if I could run her up to the bend and back,” he
added, fondly touching the bright brass knobs and glancing at the fire
with a critical eye.

“You couldn't do it alone,” answered Gus, sitting down on the grimy
little perch, willing to indulge his mate's amiable weakness.

“Give me leave to try? Steam is up, and I could do it as easy as not;”
 and Frank put his hand on the throttle-valve, as if daring Gus to give
the word.

“Fire up and make her hum!” laughed Gus, quoting Bill's frequent order
to his mate, but with no idea of being obeyed.

“All right; I'll just roll her up to the switch and back again.
I've often done it with Bill;” and Frank cautiously opened the
throttle-valve, threw back the lever, and the great thing moved with a
throb and a puff.

“Steady, old fellow, or you'll come to grief. Here, don't open that!”
 shouted Gus, for just at that moment Joe appeared at the switch, looking
ready for mischief.

“Wish he would; no train for twenty minutes, and we could run up to
the bend as well as not,” said Frank, getting excited with the sense of
power, as the monster obeyed his hand so entirely that it was impossible
to resist prolonging the delight.

“By George, he has! Stop her! Back her! Hold on, Frank!” cried Gus, as
Joe, only catching the words “Open that!” obeyed, without the least idea
that they would dare to leave the siding.

But they did, for Frank rather lost his head for a minute, and out upon
the main track rolled No. 11 as quietly as a well-trained horse taking a
familiar road.

“Now you've done it! I'll give you a good thrashing when I get back!”
 roared Gus, shaking his fist at Joe, who stood staring, half-pleased,
half-scared, at what he had done.

“Are you really going to try it?” asked Gus, as they glided on with
increasing speed, and he, too, felt the charm of such a novel adventure,
though the consequences bid fair to be serious.

“Yes, I am,” answered Frank, with the grim look he always wore when his
strong will got the upper hand. “Bill will give it to us, any way, so we
may as well have our fun out. If you are afraid, I'll slow down and you
can jump off,” and his brown eyes sparkled with the double delight of
getting his heart's desire and astonishing his friend at the same time
by his skill and coolness.

“Go ahead. I'll jump when you do;” and Gus calmly sat down again,
bound in honor to stand by his mate till the smash came, though rather
dismayed at the audacity of the prank.

“Don't you call this just splendid?” exclaimed Frank, as they rolled
along over the crossing, past the bridge, toward the curve, a mile from
the station.

“Not bad. They are yelling like mad after us. Better go back, if you
can,” said Gus, who was anxiously peering out, and, in spite of his
efforts to seem at ease, not enjoying the trip a particle.

“Let them yell. I started to go to the curve, and I'll do it if it costs
me a hundred dollars. No danger; there's no train under twenty minutes,
I tell you,” and Frank pulled out his watch. But the sun was in his
eyes, and he did not see clearly, or he would have discovered that it
was later than he thought.

On they went, and were just rounding the bend when a shrill whistle in
front startled both boys, and drove the color out of their cheeks.

“It's the factory train!” cried Gus, in a husky tone, as he sprang to
his feet.

“No; it's the five-forty on the other road,” answered Frank, with a
queer thrill all through him at the thought of what might happen if it
was not. Both looked straight ahead as the last tree glided by, and the
long track lay before them, with the freight train slowly coming down.
For an instant, the boys stood as if paralyzed.

“Jump!” said Gus, looking at the steep bank on one side and the river on
the other, undecided which to try.

“Sit still!” commanded Frank, collecting his wits, as he gave a warning
whistle to retard the on-coming train, while he reversed the engine and
went back faster than he came.

A crowd of angry men was waiting for them, and Bill stood at the open
switch in a towering passion as No. 11 returned to her place unharmed,
but bearing two pale and frightened boys, who stepped slowly and
silently down, without a word to say for themselves, while the freight
train rumbled by on the main track.

Frank and Gus never had a very clear idea as to what occurred during the
next few minutes, but vaguely remembered being well shaken, sworn at,
questioned, threatened with direful penalties, and finally ordered off
the premises forever by the wrathful depot-master. Joe was nowhere to be
seen, and as the two culprits walked away, trying to go steadily, while
their heads spun round, and all the strength seemed to have departed
from their legs, Frank said, in an exhausted tone,--

“Come down to the boat-house and rest a minute.”

Both were glad to get out of sight, and dropped upon the steps red,
rumpled, and breathless, after the late exciting scene. Gus generously
forebore to speak, though he felt that he was the least to blame;
and Frank, after eating a bit of snow to moisten his dry lips, said,
handsomely,--

“Now, don't you worry, old man. I'll pay the damages, for it was my
fault. Joe will dodge, but I won't, so make your mind easy.

“We sha'n't hear the last of this in a hurry,” responded Gus, relieved,
yet anxious, as he thought of the reprimand his father would give him.

“I hope mother won't hear of it till I tell her quietly myself. She will
be so frightened, and think I'm surely smashed up, if she is told in a
hurry;” and Frank gave a shiver, as all the danger he had run came over
him suddenly.

“I thought we were done for when we saw that train. Guess we should have
been if you had not had your wits about you. I always said you were a
cool one;” and Gus patted Frank's back with a look of great admiration,
for, now that it was all over, he considered it a very remarkable
performance.

“Which do you suppose it will be, fine or imprisonment?” asked Frank,
after sitting in a despondent attitude for a moment.

“Shouldn't wonder if it was both. Running off with an engine is no joke,
you know.”

“What did possess me to be such a fool?” groaned Frank, repenting, all
too late, of yielding to the temptation which assailed him.

“Bear up, old fellow, I'll stand by you; and if the worst comes, I'll
call as often as the rules of the prison allow,” said Gus, consolingly,
as he gave his afflicted friend an arm, and they walked away, both
feeling that they were marked men from that day forth.

Meantime, Joe, as soon as he recovered from the shock of seeing the
boys actually go off, ran away, as fast as his legs could carry him, to
prepare Mrs. Minot for the loss of her son; for the idea of their
coming safely back never occurred to him, his knowledge of engines being
limited. A loud ring at the bell brought Mrs. Pecq, who was guarding the
house, while Mrs. Minot entertained a parlor full of company.

“Frank's run off with No. 11, and he'll be killed sure. Thought I'd come
up and tell you,” stammered Joe, all out of breath and looking wild.

He got no further, for Mrs. Pecq clapped one hand over his mouth, caught
him by the collar with the other, and hustled him into the ante-room
before any one else could hear the bad news.

“Tell me all about it, and don't shout. What's come to the boy?” she
demanded, in a tone that reduced Joe to a whisper at once.

“Go right back and see what has happened to him, then come and tell me
quietly. I'll wait for you here. I wouldn't have his mother startled for
the world,” said the good soul, when she knew all.

“Oh, I dar'sn't! I opened the switch as they told me to, and Bill will
half kill me when he knows it!” cried Joe, in a panic, as the awful
consequences of his deed rose before him, showing both boys mortally
injured and several trains wrecked.

“Then take yourself off home and hold your tongue. I'll watch the door,
for I won't have any more ridiculous boys tearing in to disturb my
lady.”

Mrs. Pecq often called this good neighbor “my lady” when speaking of
her, for Mrs. Minot was a true gentlewoman, and much pleasanter to live
with than the titled mistress had been.

Joe scudded away as if the constable was after him, and presently Frank
was seen slowly approaching with an unusually sober face and a pair of
very dirty hands.

“Thank heaven, he's safe!” and, softly opening the door, Mrs. Pecq
actually hustled the young master into the ante-room as unceremoniously
as she had hustled Joe.

“I beg pardon, but the parlor is full of company, and that fool of a Joe
came roaring in with a cock-and-bull story that gave me quite a turn.
What is it, Mr. Frank?” she asked eagerly, seeing that something was
amiss.

He told her in a few words, and she was much relieved to find that no
harm had been done.

“Ah, the danger is to come,” said Frank, darkly, as he went away to wash
his hands and prepare to relate his misdeeds.

It was a very bad quarter of an hour for the poor fellow, who so seldom
had any grave faults to confess; but he did it manfully, and his mother
was so grateful for the safety of her boy that she found it difficult to
be severe enough, and contented herself with forbidding any more visits
to the too charming No. 11.

“What do you suppose will be done to me?” asked Frank, on whom the idea
of imprisonment had made a deep impression.

“I don't know, dear, but I shall go over to see Mr. Burton right after
tea. He will tell us what to do and what to expect. Gus must not suffer
for your fault.”

“He'll come off clear enough, but Joe must take his share, for if he
hadn't opened that confounded switch, no harm would have been done. But
when I saw the way clear, I actually couldn't resist going ahead,” said
Frank, getting excited again at the memory of that blissful moment when
he started the engine.

Here Jack came hurrying in, having heard the news, and refused to
believe it from any lips but Frank's. When he could no longer doubt, he
was so much impressed with the daring of the deed that he had nothing
but admiration for his brother, till a sudden thought made him clap his
hands and exclaim exultingly,--

“His runaway beats mine all hollow, and now he can't crow over me! Won't
that be a comfort? The good boy has got into a scrape. Hooray!”

This was such a droll way of taking it, that they had to laugh; and
Frank took his humiliation so meekly that Jack soon fell to comforting
him, instead of crowing over him.

Jill thought it a most interesting event; and, when Frank and his mother
went over to consult Mr. Burton, she and Jack planned out for the dear
culprit a dramatic trial which would have convulsed the soberest of
judges. His sentence was ten years' imprisonment, and such heavy fines
that the family would have been reduced to beggary but for the sums made
by Jill's fancy work and Jack's success as a champion pedestrian.

They found such comfort and amusement in this sensational programme that
they were rather disappointed when Frank returned, reporting that a fine
would probably be all the penalty exacted, as no harm had been done,
and he and Gus were such respectable boys. What would happen to Joe, he
could not tell, but he thought a good whipping ought to be added to his
share.

Of course, the affair made a stir in the little world of children; and
when Frank went to school, feeling that his character for good behavior
was forever damaged, he found himself a lion, and was in danger of being
spoiled by the admiration of his comrades, who pointed him out with
pride as “the fellow who ran off with a steam-engine.”

But an interview with Judge Kemble, a fine of twenty-five dollars, and
lectures from all the grown people of his acquaintance, prevented him
from regarding his escapade as a feat to boast of. He discovered, also,
how fickle a thing is public favor, for very soon those who had praised
began to tease, and it took all his courage, patience, and pride to
carry him through the next week or two. The lads were never tired of
alluding to No. 11, giving shrill whistles in his ear, asking if his
watch was right, and drawing locomotives on the blackboard whenever they
got a chance.

The girls, too, had sly nods and smiles, hints and jokes of a milder
sort, which made him color and fume, and once lose his dignity entirely.
Molly Loo, who dearly loved to torment the big boys, and dared attack
even solemn Frank, left one of Boo's old tin trains on the door-step,
directed to “Conductor Minot,” who, I regret to say, could not refrain
from kicking it into the street, and slamming the door with a bang
that shook the house. Shrieks of laughter from wicked Molly and her
coadjutor, Grif, greeted this explosion of wrath, which did no good,
however, for half an hour later the same cars, all in a heap, were on
the steps again, with two headless dolls tumbling out of the cab, and
the dilapidated engine labelled, “No. 11 after the collision.”

No one ever saw that ruin again, and for days Frank was utterly
unconscious of Molly's existence, as propriety forbade his having it out
with her as he had with Grif. Then Annette made peace between them, and
the approach of the Twenty-second gave the wags something else to think
of.

But it was long before Frank forgot that costly prank; for he was a
thoughtful boy, who honestly wanted to be good; so he remembered this
episode humbly, and whenever he felt the approach of temptation he made
the strong will master it, saying to himself “Down brakes!” thus saving
the precious freight he carried from many of the accidents which befall
us when we try to run our trains without orders, and so often wreck
ourselves as well as others.




Chapter XII. The Twenty-Second of February


Of course, the young ladies and gentlemen had a ball on the evening of
that day, but the boys and girls were full of excitement about their
“Scenes from the Life of Washington and other brilliant tableaux,”
 as the programme announced. The Bird Room was the theatre, being very
large, with four doors conveniently placed. Ralph was in his element,
putting up a little stage, drilling boys, arranging groups, and uniting
in himself carpenter, scene-painter, manager, and gas man. Mrs. Minot
permitted the house to be turned topsy-turvy, and Mrs. Pecq flew about,
lending a hand everywhere. Jill was costumer, with help from Miss
Delano, who did not care for balls, and kindly took charge of the girls.
Jack printed tickets, programmes, and placards of the most imposing
sort, and the work went gayly on till all was ready.

When the evening came, the Bird Room presented a fine appearance. One
end was curtained off with red drapery; and real footlights, with tin
shades, gave a truly theatrical air to the little stage. Rows of chairs,
filled with mammas and little people, occupied the rest of the space.
The hall and Frank's room were full of amused papas, uncles, and old
gentlemen whose patriotism brought them out in spite of rheumatism.
There was a great rustling of skirts, fluttering of fans, and much
lively chat, till a bell rang and the orchestra struck up.

Yes, there really was an orchestra, for Ed declared that the national
airs _must_ be played, or the whole thing would be a failure. So he had
exerted himself to collect all the musical talent he could find, a horn,
a fiddle, and a flute, with drum and fife for the martial scenes. Ed
looked more beaming than ever, as he waved his baton and led off with
Yankee Doodle as a safe beginning, for every one knew that. It was fun
to see little Johnny Cooper bang away on a big drum, and old Mr. Munson,
who had been a fifer all his days, blow till he was as red as a lobster,
while every one kept time to the music which put them all in good
spirits for the opening scene.

Up went the curtain and several trees in tubs appeared, then a stately
gentleman in small clothes, cocked hat, gray wig, and an imposing cane,
came slowly walking in. It was Gus, who had been unanimously chosen not
only for Washington but for the father of the hero also, that the family
traits of long legs and a somewhat massive nose might be preserved.

“Ahem! My trees are doing finely,” observed Mr. W., senior, strolling
along with his hands behind him, casting satisfied glances at the
dwarf orange, oleander, abutilon, and little pine that represented his
orchard.

Suddenly he starts, pauses, frowns, and, after examining the latter
shrub, which displayed several hacks in its stem and a broken limb with
six red-velvet cherries hanging on it, he gave a thump with his cane
that made the little ones jump, and cried out,--

“Can it have been my son?”

He evidently thought it _was_, for he called, in tones of thunder,--

“George! George Washington, come hither this moment!”

Great suspense on the part of the audience, then a general burst of
laughter as Boo trotted in, a perfect miniature of his honored parent,
knee breeches, cocked hat, shoe buckles and all. He was so fat that the
little tails of his coat stuck out in the drollest way, his chubby legs
could hardly carry the big buckles, and the rosy face displayed, when
he took his hat off with a dutiful bow, was so solemn, the real George
could not have looked more anxious when he gave the immortal answer.

“Sirrah, did you cut that tree?” demanded the papa, with another rap
of the cane, and such a frown that poor Boo looked dismayed, till Molly
whispered, “Put your hand up, dear.” Then he remembered his part, and,
putting one finger in his mouth, looked down at his square-toed shoes,
the image of a shame-stricken boy.

“My son, do not deceive me. If you have done this deed I shall chastise
you, for it is my duty not to spare the rod, lest I spoil the child. But
if you lie about it you disgrace the name of Washington forever.”

This appeal seemed to convulse George with inward agony, for he squirmed
most effectively as he drew from his pocket a toy hatchet, which would
not have cut a straw, then looking straight up into the awe-inspiring
countenance of his parent, he bravely lisped,--

“Papa, I tannot tell a lie. I did tut it with my little hanchet.”

“Noble boy--come to my arms! I had rather you spoilt _all_ my cherry
trees than tell one lie!” cried the delighted gentleman, catching his
son in an embrace so close that the fat legs kicked convulsively, and
the little coat-tails waved in the breeze, while cane and hatchet fell
with a dramatic bang.

The curtain descended on this affecting tableau; but the audience called
out both Washingtons, and they came, hand in hand, bowing with the
cocked hats pressed to their breasts, the elder smiling blandly, while
the younger, still flushed by his exertions, nodded to his friends,
asking, with engaging frankness, “Wasn't it nice?”

The next was a marine piece, for a boat was seen, surrounded by
tumultuous waves of blue cambric, and rowed by a party of stalwart men
in regimentals, who with difficulty kept their seats, for the boat was
only a painted board, and they sat on boxes or stools behind it. But few
marked the rowers, for in their midst, tall, straight, and steadfast as
a mast, stood one figure in a cloak, with folded arms, high boots, and,
under the turned-up hat, a noble countenance, stern with indomitable
courage. A sword glittered at his side, and a banner waved over him, but
his eye was fixed on the distant shore, and he was evidently unconscious
of the roaring billows, the blocks of ice, the discouragement of his
men, or the danger and death that might await him. Napoleon crossing
the Alps was not half so sublime, and with one voice the audience cried,
“Washington crossing the Delaware!” while the band burst forth with,
“See, the conquering hero comes!” all out of tune, but bound to play it
or die in the attempt.

It would have been very successful if, all of a sudden, one of the
rowers had not “caught a crab” with disastrous consequences. The oars
were not moving, but a veteran, who looked very much like Joe, dropped
the one he held, and in trying to turn and pummel the black-eyed warrior
behind him, he tumbled off his seat, upsetting two other men, and
pulling the painted boat upon them as they lay kicking in the cambric
deep. Shouts of laughter greeted this mishap, but George Washington
never stirred. Grasping the banner, he stood firm when all else went
down in the general wreck, and the icy waves engulfed his gallant crew,
leaving him erect amid a chaos of wildly tossing boots, entangled oars,
and red-faced victims. Such god-like dignity could not fail to impress
the frivolous crowd of laughers, and the curtain fell amid a round of
applause for him alone.

“Quite exciting, wasn't it? Didn't know Gus had so much presence of
mind,” said Mr. Burton, well pleased with his boy.

“If we did not know that Washington died in his bed, December 14, 1799,
I should fear that we'd seen the last of him in that shipwreck,” laughed
an old gentleman, proud of his memory for dates.

Much confusion reigned behind the scenes; Ralph was heard scolding, and
Joe set every one off again by explaining, audibly, that Grif tickled
him, and he couldn't stand it. A pretty, old-fashioned picture of the
“Daughters of Liberty” followed, for the girls were determined to do
honor to the brave and patient women who so nobly bore their part in the
struggle, yet are usually forgotten when those days are celebrated. The
damsels were charming in the big caps, flowered gowns, and high-heeled
shoes of their great-grandmothers, as they sat about a spider-legged
table talking over the tax, and pledging themselves to drink no more
tea till it was taken off. Molly was on her feet proposing, “Liberty
forever, and down with all tyrants,” to judge from her flashing eyes
as she held her egg-shell cup aloft, while the others lifted theirs to
drink the toast, and Merry, as hostess, sat with her hand on an antique
teapot, labelled “Sage,” ready to fill again when the patriotic ladies
were ready for a second “dish.”

This was much applauded, and the curtain went up again, for the proud
parents enjoyed seeing their pretty girls in the faded finery of a
hundred years ago. The band played “Auld Lang Syne,” as a gentle hint
that our fore-mothers should be remembered as well as the fore-fathers.

It was evident that something very martial was to follow, for a great
tramping, clashing, and flying about took place behind the scenes
while the tea-party was going on. After some delay, “The Surrender of
Cornwallis” was presented in the most superb manner, as you can believe
when I tell you that the stage was actually lined with a glittering
array of Washington and his generals, Lafayette, Kosciusko, Rochambeau
and the rest, all in astonishing uniforms, with swords which were
evidently the pride of their lives. Fife and drum struck up a march, and
in came Cornwallis, much cast down but full of manly resignation, as he
surrendered his sword, and stood aside with averted eyes while his army
marched past, piling their arms at the hero's feet.

This scene was the delight of the boys, for the rifles of Company F had
been secured, and at least a dozen soldiers kept filing in and out in
British uniform till Washington's august legs were hidden by the heaps
of arms rattled down before him. The martial music, the steady
tramp, and the patriotic memories awakened, caused this scene to be
enthusiastically encored, and the boys would have gone on marching till
midnight if Ralph had not peremptorily ordered down the curtain and
cleared the stage for the next tableau.

This had been artfully slipped in between two brilliant ones, to show
that the Father of his Country had to pay a high price for his glory.
The darkened stage represented what seemed to be a camp in a snow-storm,
and a very forlorn camp, too; for on “the cold, cold ground” (a reckless
display of cotton batting) lay ragged soldiers, sleeping without
blankets, their worn-out boots turned up pathetically, and no sign of
food or fire to be seen. A very shabby sentinel, with feet bound in
bloody cloths, and his face as pale as chalk could make it, gnawed a dry
crust as he kept his watch in the wintry night.

A tent at the back of the stage showed a solitary figure sitting on a
log of wood, poring over the map spread upon his knee, by the light of
one candle stuck in a bottle. There could be no doubt who this was, for
the buff-and-blue coat, the legs, the nose, the attitude, all betrayed
the great George laboring to save his country, in spite of privations,
discouragements, and dangers which would have daunted any other man.

“Valley Forge,” said someone, and the room was very still as old and
young looked silently at this little picture of a great and noble
struggle in one of its dark hours. The crust, the wounded feet, the
rags, the snow, the loneliness, the indomitable courage and endurance of
these men touched the hearts of all, for the mimic scene grew real for
a moment; and, when a child's voice broke the silence, asking pitifully,
“Oh, mamma, was it truly as dreadful as that?” a general outburst
answered, as if every one wanted to cheer up the brave fellows and bid
them fight on, for victory was surely coming.

In the next scene it did come, and “Washington at Trenton” was prettily
done. An arch of flowers crossed the stage, with the motto, “The
Defender of the Mothers will be the Preserver of the Daughters;” and,
as the hero with his generals advanced on one side, a troop of girls, in
old-fashioned muslin frocks, came to scatter flowers before him, singing
the song of long ago:--

  “Welcome, mighty chief, once more
  Welcome to this grateful shore;
  Now no mercenary foe
  Aims again the fatal blow,--
  Aims at thee the fatal blow.

  “Virgins fair and matrons grave,
  Those thy conquering arm did save,
  Build for thee triumphal bowers;
  Strew, ye fair, his way with flowers,--
  Strew your hero's way with flowers.”

And they did, singing with all their hearts as they flung artificial
roses and lilies at the feet of the great men, who bowed with benign
grace. Jack, who did Lafayette with a limp, covered himself with glory
by picking up one of the bouquets and pressing it to his heart with all
the gallantry of a Frenchman; and when Washington lifted the smallest
of the maids and kissed her, the audience cheered. Couldn't help it, you
know, it was so pretty and inspiring.

The Washington Family, after the famous picture, came next, with Annette
as the serene and sensible Martha, in a very becoming cap. The General
was in uniform, there being no time to change, but his attitude was
quite correct, and the Custis boy and girl displayed the wide sash and
ruffled collar with historic fidelity. The band played “Home,” and every
one agreed that it was “Sweet!”

“Now I don't see what more they can have except the death-bed, and
that would be rather out of place in this gay company,” said the old
gentleman to Mr. Burton, as he mopped his heated face after pounding so
heartily he nearly knocked the ferule off his cane.

“No; they gave that up, for my boy wouldn't wear a night-gown in public.
I can't tell secrets, but I think they have got a very clever little
finale for the first part--a pretty compliment to one person and
a pleasant surprise to all,” answered Mr. Burton, who was in great
spirits, being fond of theatricals and very justly proud of his
children, for the little girls had been among the Trenton maids, and the
mimic General had kissed his own small sister, Nelly, very tenderly.

A great deal of interest was felt as to what this surprise was to be,
and a general “Oh!” greeted the “Minute Man,” standing motionless upon
his pedestal. It was Frank, and Ralph had done his best to have the
figure as perfect as possible, for the maker of the original had been a
good friend to him; and, while the young sculptor was dancing gayly at
the ball, this copy of his work was doing him honor among the
children. Frank looked it very well, for his firm-set mouth was full of
resolution, his eyes shone keen and courageous under the three-cornered
hat, and the muscles stood out upon the bare arm that clutched the old
gun. Even the buttons on the gaiters seemed to flash defiance, as the
sturdy legs took the first step from the furrow toward the bridge where
the young farmer became a hero when he “fired the shot heard 'round the
world.”

“That _is_ splendid!” “As like to the original as flesh can be to
bronze.” “How still he stands!” “He'll fight when the time comes, and
die hard, won't he?” “Hush! You make the statue blush!” These very
audible remarks certainly did, for the color rose visibly as the modest
lad heard himself praised, though he saw but one face in all the crowd,
his mother's, far back, but full of love and pride, as she looked up at
her young minute man waiting for the battle which often calls us when we
least expect it, and for which she had done her best to make him ready.

If there had been any danger of Frank being puffed up by the success of
his statue, it was counteracted by irrepressible Grif, who, just at the
most interesting moment, when all were gazing silently, gave a whistle,
followed by a “Choo, choo, choo!” and “All aboard!” so naturally that no
one could mistake the joke, especially as another laughing voice added,
“Now, then, No. 11!” which brought down the house and the curtain too.

Frank was so angry, it was very difficult to keep him on his perch for
the last scene of all. He submitted, however, rather than spoil the
grand finale, hoping that its beauty would efface that ill-timed
pleasantry from the public mind. So, when the agreeable clamor of hands
and voices called for a repetition, the Minute Man reappeared, grimmer
than before. But not alone, for grouped all about his pedestal were
Washington and his generals, the matrons and maids, with a background of
troops shouldering arms, Grif and Joe doing such rash things with their
muskets, that more than one hero received a poke in his august back.
Before the full richness of this picture had been taken in, Ed gave a
rap, and all burst out with “Hail Columbia,” in such an inspiring style
that it was impossible for the audience to refrain from joining, which
they did, all standing and all singing with a heartiness that made the
walls ring. The fife shrilled, the horn blew sweet and clear, the fiddle
was nearly drowned by the energetic boom of the drum, and out into
the starry night, through open windows, rolled the song that stirs the
coldest heart with patriotic warmth and tunes every voice to music.

“'America!' We must have 'America!' Pipe up, Ed, this is too good to end
without one song more,” cried Mr. Burton, who had been singing like
a trumpet; and, hardly waiting to get their breath, off they all went
again with the national hymn, singing as they never had sung it before,
for somehow the little scenes they had just acted or beheld seemed
to show how much this dear America of ours had cost in more than one
revolution, how full of courage, energy, and virtue it was in spite of
all its faults, and what a privilege, as well as duty, it was for each
to do his part toward its safety and its honor in the present, as did
those brave men and women in the past.

So the “Scenes from the Life of Washington” were a great success, and,
when the songs were over, people were glad of a brief recess while they
had raptures, and refreshed themselves with lemonade.

The girls had kept the secret of who the “Princess” was to be, and,
when the curtain rose, a hum of surprise and pleasure greeted the pretty
group. Jill lay asleep in all her splendor, the bonny “Prince” just
lifting the veil to wake her with a kiss, and all about them the court
in its nap of a hundred years. The “King” and “Queen” dozing comfortably
on the throne; the maids of honor, like a garland of nodding flowers,
about the couch; the little page, unconscious of the blow about to fall,
and the fool dreaming, with his mouth wide open.

It was so pretty, people did not tire of looking, till Jack's lame leg
began to tremble, and he whispered: “Drop her or I shall pitch.” Down
went the curtain; but it rose in a moment, and there was the court after
the awakening: the “King” and “Queen” looking about them with sleepy
dignity, the maids in various attitudes of surprise, the fool grinning
from ear to ear, and the “Princess” holding out her hand to the
“Prince,” as if glad to welcome the right lover when he came at last.

Molly got the laugh this time, for she could not resist giving poor
Boo the cuff which had been hanging over him so long. She gave it
with unconscious energy, and Boo cried “Ow!” so naturally that all the
children were delighted and wanted it repeated. But Boo declined, and
the scenes which followed were found quite as much to their taste,
having been expressly prepared for the little people.

Mother Goose's Reception was really very funny, for Ralph was the old
lady, and had hired a representation of the immortal bird from a real
theatre for this occasion. There they stood, the dame in her pointed
hat, red petticoat, cap, and cane, with the noble fowl, a good deal
larger than life, beside her, and Grif inside, enjoying himself
immensely as he flapped the wings, moved the yellow legs, and waved the
long neck about, while unearthly quacks issued from the bill. That was a
great surprise for the children, and they got up in their seats to gaze
their fill, many of them firmly believing that they actually beheld the
blessed old woman who wrote the nursery songs they loved so well.

Then in came, one after another, the best of the characters she has made
famous, while a voice behind the scenes sang the proper rhyme as each
made their manners to the interesting pair. “Mistress Mary,” and
her “pretty maids all in a row,” passed by to their places in the
background; “King Cole” and his “fiddlers three” made a goodly show; so
did the royal couple, who followed the great pie borne before them, with
the “four-and-twenty blackbirds” popping their heads out in the most
delightful way. Little “Bo-Peep” led a woolly lamb and wept over its
lost tail, for not a sign of one appeared on the poor thing. “Simple
Simon” followed the pie-man, gloating over his wares with the drollest
antics. The little wife came trundling by in a wheelbarrow and was not
upset; neither was the lady with “rings on her fingers and bells on her
toes,” as she cantered along on a rocking-horse. “Bobby Shafto's” yellow
hair shone finely as he led in the maid whom he came back from sea
to marry. “Miss Muffet,” bowl in hand, ran away from an immense black
spider, which waggled its long legs in a way so life-like that some of
the children shook in their little shoes. The beggars who came to town
were out in full force, “rags, tags, and velvet gowns,” quite true to
life. “Boy Blue” rubbed his eyes, with hay sticking in his hair, and
tooted on a tin horn as if bound to get the cows out of the corn. Molly,
with a long-handled frying-pan, made a capital “Queen,” in a tucked-up
gown, checked apron, and high crown, to good “King Arthur,” who, very
properly, did not appear after stealing the barley-meal, which might be
seen in the pan tied up in a pudding, like a cannon-ball, ready to fry.

But Tobias, Molly's black cat, covered himself with glory by the spirit
with which he acted his part in,

  “Sing, sing, what shall I sing?
  The cat's run away with the pudding-bag string.”

First he was led across the stage on his hind legs, looking very fierce
and indignant, with a long tape trailing behind him; and, being set
free at the proper moment, he gave one bound over the four-and-twenty
blackbirds who happened to be in the way, and dashed off as if an
enraged cook had actually been after him, straight downstairs to the
coal-bin, where he sat glaring in the dark, till the fun was over.

When all the characters had filed in and stood in two long rows, music
struck up and they danced, “All the way to Boston,” a simple but lively
affair, which gave each a chance to show his or her costume as they
pranced down the middle and up outside.

Such a funny medley as it was, for there went fat “King Cole” with the
most ragged of the beggar-maids. “Mistress Mary,” in her pretty blue
dress, tripped along with “Simple Simon” staring about him like a
blockhead. The fine lady left her horse to dance with “Bobby Shafto”
 till every bell on her slippers tinkled its tongue out. “Bo-Peep” and
a jolly fiddler skipped gayly up and down. “Miss Muffet” took the big
spider for her partner, and made his many legs fly about in the wildest
way. The little wife got out of the wheelbarrow to help “Boy Blue”
 along, and Molly, with the frying-pan over her shoulder, led off
splendidly when it was “Grand right and left.”

But the old lady and her goose were the best of all, for the dame's
shoe-buckles cut the most astonishing pigeon-wings, and to see that
mammoth bird waddle down the middle with its wings half open, its long
neck bridling, and its yellow legs in the first position as it curtsied
to its partner, was a sight to remember, it was so intensely funny.

The merry old gentleman laughed till he cried; Mr. Burton split his
gloves, he applauded so enthusiastically; while the children beat
the dust out of the carpet hopping up and down, as they cried: “Do it
again!” “We want it all over!” when the curtain went down at last on the
flushed and panting party, Mother G---- bowing, with her hat all awry,
and the goose doing a double shuffle as if it did not know how to leave
off.

But they could not “do it all over again,” for it was growing late, and
the people felt that they certainly had received their money's worth
that evening.

So it all ended merrily, and when the guests departed the boys cleared
the room like magic, and the promised supper to the actors was served in
handsome style. Jack and Jill were at one end, Mrs. Goose and her bird
at the other, and all between was a comical collection of military
heroes, fairy characters, and nursery celebrities. All felt the need of
refreshment after their labors, and swept over the table like a flight
of locusts, leaving devastation behind. But they had earned their fun:
and much innocent jollity prevailed, while a few lingering papas and
mammas watched the revel from afar, and had not the heart to order these
noble beings home till even the Father of his Country declared “that
he'd had a perfectly splendid time, but couldn't keep his eyes open
another minute,” and very wisely retired to replace the immortal cocked
hat with a night-cap.




Chapter XIII. Jack Has a Mystery


“What is the matter? Does your head ache?” asked Jill, one evening in
March, observing that Jack sat with his head in his hands, an attitude
which, with him, meant either pain or perplexity.

“No; but I'm bothered. I want some money, and I don't see how I can earn
it,” he answered, tumbling his hair about, and frowning darkly at the
fire.

“How much?” and Jill's ready hand went to the pocket where her little
purse lay, for she felt rich with several presents lately made her.

“Two seventy-five. No, thank you, I won't borrow.”

“What is it for?”

“Can't tell.”

“Why, I thought you told me everything.”

“Sorry, but I can't this time. Don't you worry; I shall think of
something.”

“Couldn't your mother help?”

“Don't wish to ask her.”

“Why! can't _she_ know?”

“Nobody can.”

“How queer! Is it a scrape, Jack?” asked Jill, looking as curious as a
magpie.

“It is likely to be, if I can't get out of it this week, somehow.”

“Well, I don't see how I can help if I'm not to know anything;” and Jill
seemed rather hurt.

“You can just stop asking questions, and tell me how a fellow can earn
some money. That would help. I've got one dollar, but I must have some
more;” and Jack looked worried as he fingered the little gold dollar on
his watch-guard.

“Oh, do you mean to use that?”

“Yes, I do; a man must pay his debts if he sells all he has to do it,”
 said Jack sternly.

“Dear me; it must be something very serious.” And Jill lay quite still
for five minutes, thinking over all the ways in which Jack ever did earn
money, for Mrs. Minot liked to have her boys work, and paid them in some
way for all they did.

“Is there any wood to saw?” she asked presently, being very anxious to
help.

“All done.”

“Paths to shovel?”

“No snow.”

“Lawn to rake, then?”

“Not time for that yet.”

“Catalogue of books?”

“Frank got that job.”

“Copy those letters for your mother?”

“Take me too long. Must have my money Friday, if possible.”

“I don't see what we can do, then. It is too early or too late for
everything, and you won't borrow.”

“Not of you. No, nor of any one else, if I can possibly help it. I've
promised to do this myself, and I will;” and Jack wagged his head
resolutely.

“Couldn't you do something with the printing-press? Do me some cards,
and then, perhaps, the other girls will want some,” said Jill, as a
forlorn hope.

“Just the thing! What a goose I was not to think of it. I'll rig the old
machine up at once.” And, starting from his seat, Jack dived into the
big closet, dragged out the little press, and fell to oiling, dusting,
and putting it in order, like one relieved of a great anxiety.

“Give me the types; I'll sort them and set up my name, so you can begin
as soon as you are ready. You know what a help I was when we did the
programmes. I'm almost sure the girls _will_ want cards, and I know
your mother would like some more tags,” said Jill, briskly rattling the
letters into the different compartments, while Jack inked the rollers
and hunted up his big apron, whistling the while with recovered spirits.

A dozen neat cards were soon printed, and Jill insisted on paying six
cents for them, as earning was not borrowing. A few odd tags were found
and done for Mamma, who immediately ordered four dozen at six cents a
dozen, though she was not told why there was such a pressing call for
money.

Jack's monthly half-dollar had been spent the first week,--twenty-five
cents for a concert, ten paid a fine for keeping a book too long from
the library, ten more to have his knife ground, and five in candy, for
he dearly loved sweeties, and was under bonds to Mamma not to spend
more than five cents a month on these unwholesome temptations. She never
asked the boys what they did with their money, but expected them to
keep account in the little books she gave them; and, now and then, they
showed the neat pages with pardonable pride, though she often laughed at
the queer items.

All that evening Jack & Co. worked busily, for when Frank came in he
good-naturedly ordered some pale-pink cards for Annette, and ran to the
store to choose the right shade, and buy some packages for the young
printer also.

“What _do_ you suppose he is in such a pucker for?” whispered Jill, as
she set up the new name, to Frank, who sat close by, with one eye on his
book and one on her.

“Oh, some notion. He's a queer chap; but I guess it isn't much of a
scrape, or I should know it. He's so good-natured he's always promising
to do things for people, and has too much pluck to give up when he finds
he can't. Let him alone, and it will all come out soon enough,” answered
Frank, who laughed at his brother, but loved him none the less for the
tender heart that often got the better of his young head.

But for once Frank was mistaken; the mystery did not come out, and Jack
worked like a beaver all that week, as orders poured in when Jill and
Annette showed their elegant cards; for, as everybody knows, if one girl
has a new thing all the rest must, whether it is a bow on the top of
her head, a peculiar sort of pencil, or the latest kind of chewing-gum.
Little play did the poor fellow get, for every spare minute was spent
at the press, and no invitation could tempt him away, so much in earnest
was our honest little Franklin about paying his debt. Jill helped all
she could, and cheered his labors with her encouragement, remembering
how he stayed at home for her.

“It is real good of you to lend a hand, and I'm ever so much obliged,”
 said Jack, as the last order was struck off, and the drawer of the
type-box held a pile of shining five and ten cent pieces, with two or
three quarters.

“I love to; only it would be nicer if I knew what we were working for,”
 she said demurely, as she scattered type for the last time; and seeing
that Jack was both tired and grateful, hoped to get a hint of the
secret.

“I want to tell you, dreadfully; but I can't, because I've promised.”

“What, never?”

“Never!” and Jack looked as firm as a rock.

“Then I shall find out, for _I_ haven't promised.”

“You can't.”

“See if I don't!”

“You are sharp, but you won't guess this. It's a tremendous secret, and
nobody will tell it.”

“You'll tell it yourself. You always do.”

“I won't tell this. It would be mean.”

“Wait and see; I can get anything out of you if I try;” and Jill
laughed, knowing her power well, for Jack found it very hard to keep a
secret from her.

“Don't try; please don't! It wouldn't be right, and you don't want to
make me do a dishonorable thing for your sake, I know.”

Jack looked so distressed that Jill promised not to _make_ him tell,
though she held herself free to find out in other ways, if she could.

Thus relieved, Jack trudged off to school on Friday with the two dollars
and seventy-five cents jingling in his pocket, though the dear gold coin
had to be sacrificed to make up the sum. He did his lessons badly that
day, was late at recess in the afternoon, and, as soon as school was
over, departed in his rubber boots “to take a walk,” he said, though the
roads were in a bad state with a spring thaw. Nothing was seen of him
till after tea-time, when he came limping in, very dirty and tired,
but with a reposeful expression, which betrayed that a load was off his
mind. Frank was busy about his own affairs and paid little attention to
him, but Jill was on tenter-hooks to know where he had been, yet dared
not ask the question.

“Merry's brother wants some cards. He liked hers so much he wishes to
make his lady-love a present. Here's the name;” and Jill held up the
order from Harry Grant, who was to be married in the autumn.

“Must wait till next week. I'm too tired to do a thing to-night, and I
hate the sight of that old press,” answered Jack, laying himself down
upon the rug as if every joint ached.

“What made you take such a long walk? You look as tired as if you'd been
ten miles,” said Jill, hoping to discover the length of the trip.

“Had to. Four or five miles isn't much, only my leg bothered me;” and
Jack gave the ailing member a slap, as if he had found it much in his
way that day; for, though he had given up the crutches long ago, he
rather missed their support sometimes. Then, with a great yawn, he
stretched himself out to bask in the blaze, pillowing his head on his
arms.

“Dear old thing, he looks all used up; I won't plague him with talking;”
 and Jill began to sing, as she often did in the twilight.

By the time the first song ended a gentle snore was heard, and Jack lay
fast asleep, worn out with the busy week and the walk, which had been
longer and harder than any one guessed. Jill took up her knitting and
worked quietly by firelight, still wondering and guessing what the
secret could be; for she had not much to amuse her, and little things
were very interesting if connected with her friends. Presently Jack
rolled over and began to mutter in his sleep, as he often did when too
weary for sound slumber. Jill paid no attention till he uttered a name
which made her prick up her ears and listen to the broken sentences
which followed. Only a few words, but she dropped her work, saying to
herself,--

“I do believe he is talking about the secret. Now I shall find out, and
he _will_ tell me himself, as I said he would.”

Much pleased, she leaned and listened, but could make no sense of the
confused babble about “heavy boots;” “All right, old fellow;” “Jerry's
off;” and “The ink is too thick.”

The slam of the front door woke Jack, and he pulled himself up,
declaring that he believed he had been having a nap.

“I wish you'd have another,” said Jill, greatly disappointed at the loss
of the intelligence she seemed to be so near getting.

“Floor is too hard for tired bones. Guess I'll go to bed and get rested
up for Monday. I've worked like fury this week, so next I'm going in for
fun;” and, little dreaming what hard times were in store for him, Jack
went off to enjoy his warm bath and welcome bed, where he was soon
sleeping with the serene look of one whose dreams were happy, whose
conscience was at rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

“I have a few words to say to you before you go,” said Mr. Acton,
pausing with his hand on the bell, Monday afternoon, when the hour came
for dismissing school.

The bustle of putting away books and preparing for as rapid a departure
as propriety allowed, subsided suddenly, and the boys and girls sat as
still as mice, while the hearts of such as had been guilty of any small
sins began to beat fast.

“You remember that we had some trouble last winter about keeping the
boys away from the saloon, and that a rule was made forbidding any
pupil to go to town during recess?” began Mr. Acton, who, being a
conscientious man as well as an excellent teacher, felt that he was
responsible for the children in school hours, and did his best to aid
parents in guarding them from the few temptations which beset them in
a country town. A certain attractive little shop, where confectionery,
baseballs, stationery, and picture papers were sold, was a favorite
loafing place for some of the boys till the rule forbidding it was made,
because in the rear of the shop was a beer and billiard saloon. A wise
rule, for the picture papers were not always of the best sort; cigars
were to be had; idle fellows hung about there, and some of the lads, who
wanted to be thought manly, ventured to pass the green baize door “just
to look on.”

A murmur answered the teacher's question, and he continued, “You all
know that the rule was broken several times, and I told you the next
offender would be publicly reprimanded, as private punishments had no
effect. I am sorry to say that the time has come, and the offender is a
boy whom I trusted entirely. It grieves me to do this, but I must keep
my promise, and hope the example will have a good effect.”

Mr. Acton paused, as if he found it hard to go on, and the boys looked
at one another with inquiring eyes, for their teacher seldom punished,
and when he did, it was a very solemn thing. Several of these anxious
glances fell upon Joe, who was very red and sat whittling a pencil as if
he dared not lift his eyes.

“He's the chap. Won't he catch it?” whispered Gus to Frank, for both
owed him a grudge.

“The boy who broke the rule last Friday, at afternoon recess, will come
to the desk,” said Mr. Acton in his most impressive manner.

If a thunderbolt had fallen through the roof it would hardly have caused
a greater surprise than the sight of Jack Minot walking slowly down the
aisle, with a wrathful flash in the eyes he turned on Joe as he passed
him.

“Now, Minot, let us have this over as soon as possible, for I do not
like it any better than you do, and I am sure there is some mistake. I'm
told you went to the shop on Friday. Is it true?” asked Mr. Acton very
gently, for he liked Jack and seldom had to correct him in any way.

“Yes, sir;” and Jack looked up as if proud to show that he was not
afraid to tell the truth as far as he could.

“To buy something?”

“No, sir.”

“To meet someone?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Was it Jerry Shannon?”

No answer, but Jack's fists doubled up of themselves as he shot another
fiery glance at Joe, whose face burned as if it scorched him.

“I am told it was; also that you were seen to go into the saloon with
him. Did you?” and Mr. Acton looked so sure that it was a mistake that
it cost Jack a great effort to say, slowly,--

“Yes, sir.”

Quite a thrill pervaded the school at this confession, for Jerry was one
of the wild fellows the boys all shunned, and to have any dealings with
him was considered a very disgraceful thing.

“Did you play?”

“No, sir. I can't.”

“Drink beer?”

“I belong to the Lodge;” and Jack stood as erect as any little soldier
who ever marched under a temperance banner, and fought for the cause
none are too young nor too old to help along.

“I was sure of that. Then what took you there, my boy?”

The question was so kindly put that Jack forgot himself an instant, and
blurted out,--

“I only went to pay him some money, sir.”

“Ah, how much?”

“Two seventy-five,” muttered Jack, as red as a cherry at not being able
to keep a secret better.

“Too much for a lad like you to owe such a fellow as Jerry. How came
it?” And Mr. Acton looked disturbed.

Jack opened his lips to speak, but shut them again, and stood looking
down with a little quiver about the mouth that showed how much it cost
him to be silent.

“Does any one beside Jerry know of this?”

“One other fellow,” after a pause.

“Yes, I understand;” and Mr. Acton's eye glanced at Joe with a look that
seemed to say, “I wish he'd held his tongue.”

A queer smile flitted over Jack's face, for Joe was not the “other
fellow,” and knew very little about it, excepting what he had seen when
he was sent on an errand by Mr. Acton on Friday.

“I wish you would explain the matter, John, for I am sure it is better
than it seems, and it would be very hard to punish you when you don't
deserve it.”

“But I do deserve it; I've broken the rule, and I ought to be punished,”
 said Jack, as if a good whipping would be easier to bear than this
public cross-examination.

“And you can't explain, or even say you are sorry or ashamed?” asked Mr.
Acton, hoping to surprise another fact out of the boy.

“No, sir; I can't; I'm not ashamed; I'm not sorry, and I'd do it again
to-morrow if I had to,” cried Jack, losing patience, and looking as if
he would not bear much more.

A groan from the boys greeted this bare-faced declaration, and Susy
quite shivered at the idea of having taken two bites out of the apple of
such a hardened desperado.

“Think it over till to-morrow, and perhaps you will change your mind.
Remember that this is the last week of the month, and reports are
given out next Friday,” said Mr. Acton, knowing how much the boy prided
himself on always having good ones to show his mother.

Poor Jack turned scarlet and bit his lips to keep them still, for he had
forgotten this when he plunged into the affair which was likely to cost
him dear. Then the color faded away, the boyish face grew steady, and
the honest eyes looked up at his teacher as he said very low, but all
heard him, the room was so still,--

“It isn't as bad as it looks, sir, but I can't say any more. No one is
to blame but me; and I couldn't help breaking the rule, for Jerry was
going away, I had only that time, and I'd promised to pay up, so I did.”

Mr. Acton believed every word he said, and regretted that they had not
been able to have it out privately, but he, too, must keep his promise
and punish the offender, whoever he was.

“Very well, you will lose your recess for a week, and this month's
report will be the first one in which behavior does not get the highest
mark. You may go; and I wish it understood that Master Minot is not to
be troubled with questions till he chooses to set this matter right.”

Then the bell rang, the children trooped out, Mr. Acton went off without
another word, and Jack was left alone to put up his books and hide a
few tears that would come because Frank turned his eyes away from the
imploring look cast upon him as the culprit came down from the platform,
a disgraced boy.

Elder brothers are apt to be a little hard on younger ones, so it is not
surprising that Frank, who was an eminently proper boy, was much cut up
when Jack publicly confessed to dealings with Jerry, leaving it to be
supposed that the worst half of the story remained untold. He felt it
his duty, therefore, to collar poor Jack when he came out, and talk to
him all the way home, like a judge bent on getting at the truth by main
force. A kind word would have been very comforting, but the scolding
was too much for Jack's temper, so he turned dogged and would not say a
word, though Frank threatened not to speak to him for a week.

At tea-time both boys were very silent, one looking grim, the other
excited. Frank stared sternly at his brother across the table, and no
amount of marmalade sweetened or softened that reproachful look. Jack
defiantly crunched his toast, with occasional slashes at the butter,
as if he must vent the pent-up emotions which half distracted him. Of
course, their mother saw that something was amiss, but did not allude to
it, hoping that the cloud would blow over as so many did if left alone.
But this one did not, and when both refused cake, this sure sign of
unusual perturbation made her anxious to know the cause. As soon as tea
was over, Jack retired with gloomy dignity to his own room, and Frank,
casting away the paper he had been pretending to read, burst out with
the whole story. Mrs. Minot was as much surprised as he, but not angry,
because, like most mothers, she was sure that her sons could not do
anything very bad.

“I will speak to him; my boy won't refuse to give _me_ some
explanation,” she said, when Frank had freed his mind with as much
warmth as if Jack had broken all the ten commandments.

“He will. You often call me obstinate, but he is as pig-headed as a
mule; Joe only knows what he saw, old tell-tale! and Jerry has left
town, or I'd have it out of him. Make Jack own up, whether he can or
not. Little donkey!” stormed Frank, who hated rowdies and could not
forgive his brother for being seen with one.

“My dear, all boys do foolish things sometimes, even the wisest and best
behaved, so don't be hard on the poor child. He has got into trouble,
I've no doubt, but it cannot be very bad, and he earned the money to pay
for his prank, whatever it was.”

Mrs. Minot left the room as she spoke, and Frank cooled down as if her
words had been a shower-bath, for he remembered his own costly escapade,
and how kindly both his mother and Jack had stood by him on that trying
occasion. So, feeling rather remorseful, he went off to talk it over
with Gus, leaving Jill in a fever of curiosity, for Merry and Molly
had dropped in on their way home to break the blow to her, and Frank
declined to discuss it with her, after mildly stating that Jack was “a
ninny,” in his opinion.

“Well, I know one thing,” said Jill confidentially to Snow-ball, when
they were left alone together, “if every one else is scolding him I
won't say a word. It's so mean to crow over people when they are down,
and I'm sure he hasn't done anything to be ashamed of, though he won't
tell.”

Snow-ball seemed to agree to this, for he went and sat down by Jack's
slippers waiting for him on the hearth, and Jill thought that a very
touching proof of affectionate fidelity to the little master who ruled
them both.

When he came, it was evident that he had found it harder to refuse his
mother than all the rest. But she trusted him in spite of appearances,
and that was such a comfort! For poor Jack's heart was very full, and he
longed to tell the whole story, but he would not break his promise,
and so kept silence bravely. Jill asked no questions, affecting to be
anxious for the games they always played together in the evening, but
while they played, though the lips were sealed, the bright eyes said as
plainly as words, “I trust you,” and Jack was very grateful.

It was well he had something to cheer him up at home, for he got little
peace at school. He bore the grave looks of Mr. Acton meekly, took the
boys' jokes good-naturedly, and withstood the artful teasing of the
girls with patient silence. But it was very hard for the social,
affectionate fellow to bear the general distrust, for he had been such a
favorite he felt the change keenly.

But the thing that tried him most was the knowledge that his report
would not be what it usually was. It was always a happy moment when he
showed it to his mother, and saw her eye brighten as it fell on the 99
or 100, for she cared more for good behavior than for perfect lessons.
Mr. Acton once said that Frank Minot's moral influence in the school was
unusual, and Jack never forgot her pride and delight as she told them
what Frank himself had not known till then. It was Jack's ambition to
have the same said of him, for he was not much of a scholar, and he
had tried hard since he went back to school to get good records in that
respect at least. Now here was a dreadful downfall, tardy marks, bad
company, broken rules, and something too wrong to tell, apparently.

“Well, I deserve a good report, and that's a comfort, though nobody
believes it,” he said to himself, trying to keep up his spirits, as the
slow week went by, and no word from him had cleared up the mystery.




Chapter XIV. And Jill Finds It Out


Jill worried about it more than he did, for she was a faithful little
friend, and it was a great trial to have Jack even suspected of doing
anything wrong. School is a child's world while he is there, and its
small affairs are very important to him, so Jill felt that the one thing
to be done was to clear away the cloud about her dear boy, and restore
him to public favor.

“Ed will be here Saturday night and may be he will find out, for Jack
tells him everything. I do hate to have him hectored so, for I know he
is, though he's too proud to complain,” she said, on Thursday evening,
when Frank told her some joke played upon his brother that day.

“I let him alone, but I see that he isn't badgered too much. That's all
I can do. If Ed had only come home last Saturday it might have done
some good, but now it will be too late; for the reports are given out
to-morrow, you know,” answered Frank, feeling a little jealous of Ed's
influence over Jack, though his own would have been as great if he had
been as gentle.

“Has Jerry come back?” asked Jill, who kept all her questions for Frank,
because she seldom alluded to the tender subject when with Jack.

“No, he's off for the summer. Got a place somewhere. Hope he'll stay
there and let Bob alone.”

“Where is Bob now? I don't hear much about him lately,” said Jill, who
was constantly on the lookout for “the other fellow,” since it was not
Joe.

“Oh, he went to Captain Skinner's the first of March, chores round, and
goes to school up there. Captain is strict, and won't let Bob come to
town, except Sundays; but he don't mind it much, for he likes horses,
has nice grub, and the Hill fellows are good chaps for him to be with.
So he's all right, if he only behaves.”

“How far is it to Captain Skinner's?” asked Jill suddenly, having
listened, with her sharp eyes on Frank, as he tinkered away at his
model, since he was forbidden all other indulgence in his beloved
pastime.

“It's four miles to Hill District, but the Captain lives this side of
the school-house. About three from here, I should say.”

“How long would it take a boy to walk up there?” went on the questioner,
with a new idea in her head.

“Depends on how much of a walkist he is.”

“Suppose he was lame and it was sloshy, and he made a call and came
back. How long would that take?” asked Jill impatiently.

“Well, in that case, I should say two or three hours. But it's
impossible to tell exactly, unless you know how lame the fellow was, and
how long a call he made,” said Frank, who liked to be accurate.

“Jack couldn't do it in less, could he?”

“He used to run up that hilly road for a breather, and think nothing of
it. It would be a long job for him now, poor little chap, for his leg
often troubles him, though he hates to own it.”

Jill lay back and laughed, a happy little laugh, as if she was pleased
about something, and Frank looked over his shoulder to ask questions in
his turn.

“What are you laughing at?”

“Can't tell.”

“Why do you want to know about Hill District? Are you going there?”

“Wish I could! I'd soon have it out of him.”

“Who?”

“Never mind. Please push up my table. I must write a letter, and I want
you to post it for me to-night, and never say a word till I give you
leave.”

“Oh, now _you_ are going to have secrets and be mysterious, and get into
a mess, are you?” and Frank looked down at her with a suspicious air,
though he was intensely curious to know what she was about.

“Go away till I'm done. You will have to see the outside, but you can't
know the inside till the answer comes;” and propping herself up, Jill
wrote the following note, with some hesitation at the beginning and end,
for she did not know the gentleman she was addressing, except by sight,
and it was rather awkward:--

“Robert Walker.

“Dear Sir, I want to ask if Jack Minot came to see you last Friday
afternoon. He got into trouble being seen with Jerry Shannon. He paid
him some money. Jack won't tell, and Mr. Acton talked to him about it
before all the school. We feel bad, because we think Jack did not do
wrong. I don't know as you have anything to do with it, but I thought
I'd ask. Please answer quick. Respectfully yours,

“Jane Pecq”

To make sure that her despatch was not tampered with, Jill put a great
splash of red sealing-wax on it, which gave it a very official look, and
much impressed Bob when he received it.

“There! Go and post it, and don't let any one see or know about it,” she
said, handing it over to Frank, who left his work with unusual alacrity
to do her errand. When his eye fell on the address, he laughed, and said
in a teasing way,--

“Are you and Bob such good friends that you correspond? What will Jack
say?”

“Don't know, and don't care! Be good, now, and let's have a little
secret as well as other folks. I'll tell you all about it when he
answers,” said Jill in her most coaxing tone.

“Suppose he doesn't?”

“Then I shall send you up to see him. I _must_ know something, and I
want to do it myself, if I can.”

“Look here; what are you after? I do believe you think----” Frank got
no farther, for Jill gave a little scream, and stopped him by crying
eagerly, “Don't say it out loud! I really do believe it may be, and I'm
going to find out.”

“What made you think of him?” and Frank looked thoughtfully at the
letter, as if turning carefully over in his mind the idea that Jill's
quick wits had jumped at.

“Come here and I'll tell you.”

Holding him by one button, she whispered something in his ear that made
him exclaim, with a look at the rug,--

“No! did he? I declare I shouldn't wonder! It would be just like the
dear old blunder-head.”

“I never thought of it till you told me where Bob was, and then it all
sort of burst upon me in one minute!” cried Jill, waving her arms about
to express the intellectual explosion which had thrown light upon the
mystery, like sky-rockets in a dark night.

“You are as bright as a button. No time to lose; I'm off;” and off he
was, splashing through the mud to post the letter, on the back of which
he added, to make the thing sure, “Hurry up. F.M.”

Both felt rather guilty next day, but enjoyed themselves very much
nevertheless, and kept chuckling over the mine they were making under
Jack's unconscious feet. They hardly expected an answer at noon, as the
Hill people were not very eager for their mail, but at night Jill was
sure of a letter, and to her great delight it came. Jack brought it
himself, which added to the fun, and while she eagerly read it he sat
calmly poring over the latest number of his own private and particular
“Youth's Companion.”

Bob was not a “complete letter-writer” by any means, and with great
labor and much ink had produced the following brief but highly
satisfactory epistle. Not knowing how to address his fair correspondent
he let it alone, and went at once to the point in the frankest possible
way:--

“Jack did come up Friday. Sorry he got into a mess. It was real kind of
him, and I shall pay him back soon. Jack paid Jerry for me and I made
him promise not to tell. Jerry said he'd come here and make a row if I
didn't cash up. I was afraid I'd lose the place if he did, for the Capt.
is awful strict. If Jack don't tell now, I will. I ain't mean. Glad you
wrote.

“R.O.W.”

“Hurrah!” cried Jill, waving the letter over her head in great triumph.
“Call everybody and read it out,” she added, as Frank snatched it, and
ran for his mother, seeing at a glance that the news was good. Jill
was so afraid she should tell before the others came that she burst out
singing “Pretty Bobby Shafto” at the top of her voice, to Jack's great
disgust, for he considered the song very personal, as he _was_ rather
fond of “combing down his yellow hair,” and Jill often plagued him by
singing it when he came in with the golden quirls very smooth and nice
to hide the scar on his forehead.

In about five minutes the door flew open and in came Mamma, making
straight for bewildered Jack, who thought the family had gone crazy when
his parent caught him in her arms, saying tenderly,--

“My good, generous boy! I knew he was right all the time!” while Frank
worked his hand up and down like a pump-handle, exclaiming heartily,--

“You're a trump, sir, and I'm proud of you!” Jill meantime calling out,
in wild delight,--

“I told you so! I told you so! I did find out; ha, ha, I did!”

“Come, I say! What's the matter? I'm all right. Don't squeeze the breath
out of me, please,” expostulated Jack, looking so startled and innocent,
as he struggled feebly, that they all laughed, and this plaintive
protest caused him to be released. But the next proceeding did not
enlighten him much, for Frank kept waving a very inky paper before him
and ordering him to read it, while Mamma made a charge at Jill, as if it
was absolutely necessary to hug somebody.

“Hullo!” said Jack, when he got the letter into his own hand and
read it. “Now who put Bob up to this? Nobody had any business to
interfere--but it's mighty good of him, anyway,” he added, as the
anxious lines in his round face smoothed themselves away, while a smile
of relief told how hard it had been for him to keep his word.

“I did!” cried Jill, clapping her hands, and looking so happy that he
could not have scolded her if he had wanted to.

“Who told you he was in the scrape?” demanded Jack, in a hurry to know
all about it now the seal was taken off his own lips.

“You did;” and Jill's face twinkled with naughty satisfaction, for this
was the best fun of all.

“I didn't! When? Where? It's a joke!”

“You did,” cried Jill, pointing to the rug. “You went to sleep there
after the long walk, and talked in your sleep about 'Bob' and 'All
right, old boy,' and ever so much gibberish. I didn't think about it
then, but when I heard that Bob was up there I thought may be he knew
something about it, and last night I wrote and asked him, and that's the
answer, and now it _is_ all right, and you are the best boy that ever
was, and I'm so glad!”

Here Jill paused, all out of breath, and Frank said, with an approving
pat on the head,--

“It won't do to have such a sharp young person round if we are going to
have secrets. You'd make a good detective, miss.”

“Catch me taking naps before people again;” and Jack looked rather
crestfallen that his own words had set “Fine Ear” on the track. “Never
mind, I didn't _mean_ to tell, though I just ached to do it all the
time, so I haven't broken my word. I'm glad you all know, but you
needn't let it get out, for Bob is a good fellow, and it might make
trouble for him,” added Jack, anxious lest his gain should be the
other's loss.

“I shall tell Mr. Acton myself, and the Captain, also, for I'm not going
to have my son suspected of wrong-doing when he has only tried to help a
friend, and borne enough for his sake,” said Mamma, much excited by this
discovery of generous fidelity in her boy; though when one came to look
at it calmly, one saw that it might have been done in a wiser way.

“Now, please, don't make a fuss about it; that would be most as bad as
having every one down on me. I can stand your praising me, but I won't
be patted on the head by anybody else;” and Jack assumed a manly air,
though his face was full of genuine boyish pleasure at being set right
in the eyes of those he loved.

“I'll be discreet, dear, but you owe it to yourself, as well as Bob, to
have the truth known. Both have behaved well, and no harm will come to
him, I am sure. I'll see to that myself,” said Mrs. Minot, in a tone
that set Jack's mind at rest on that point.

“Now do tell all about it,” cried Jill, who was pining to know the whole
story, and felt as if she had earned the right to hear it.

“Oh, it wasn't much. We promised Ed to stand by Bob, so I did as well
as I knew how;” and Jack seemed to think that was about all there was to
say.

“I never saw such a fellow for keeping a promise! You stick to it
through thick and thin, no matter how silly or hard it is. You remember,
mother, last summer, how you told him not to go in a boat and he
promised, the day we went on the picnic. We rode up, but the horse ran
off home, so we had to come back by way of the river, all but Jack, and
he walked every step of five miles because he wouldn't go near a boat,
though Mr. Burton was there to take care of him. I call that rather
overdoing the matter;” and Frank looked as if he thought moderation even
in virtue a good thing.

“And I call it a fine sample of entire obedience. He obeyed orders, and
that is what we all must do, without always seeing why, or daring to
use our own judgment. It is a great safeguard to Jack, and a very great
comfort to me; for I know that if he promises he will keep his word,
no matter what it costs him,” said Mamma warmly, as she tumbled up
the quirls with an irrepressible caress, remembering how the boy came
wearily in after all the others, without seeming for a moment to think
that he could have done anything else.

“Like Casabianca!” cried Jill, much impressed, for obedience was her
hardest trial.

“I think he was a fool to burn up,” said Frank, bound not to give in.

“I don't. It's a splendid piece, and every one likes to speak it, and
it was true, and it wouldn't be in all the books if he was a fool. Grown
people know what is good,” declared Jill, who liked heroic actions, and
was always hoping for a chance to distinguish herself in that way.

“You admire 'The Charge of the Light Brigade,' and glow all over as
you thunder it out. Yet they went gallantly to their death rather than
disobey orders. A mistake, perhaps, but it makes us thrill to hear of
it; and the same spirit keeps my Jack true as steel when once his word
is passed, or he thinks it is his duty. Don't be laughed out of it, my
son, for faithfulness in little things fits one for heroism when the
great trials come. One's conscience can hardly be too tender when honor
and honesty are concerned.”

“You are right, mother, and I am wrong. I beg your pardon, Jack, and you
sha'n't get ahead of me next time.”

Frank made his mother a little bow, gave his brother a shake of the
hand, and nodded to Jill, as if anxious to show that he was not too
proud to own up when he made a mistake.

“Please tell on, Jack. This is very nice, but I do want to know all
about the other,” said Jill, after a short pause.

“Let me see. Oh, I saw Bob at church, and he looked rather blue; so,
after Sunday School, I asked what the matter was. He said Jerry bothered
him for some money he lent him at different times when they were loafing
round together, before we took him up. He wouldn't get any wages for
some time. The Captain keeps him short on purpose, I guess, and won't
let him come down town except on Sundays. He didn't want any one to know
about it, for fear he'd lose his place. So I promised I wouldn't tell.
Then I was afraid Jerry would go and make a fuss, and Bob would run off,
or do something desperate, being worried, and I said I'd pay it for him,
if I could. So he went home pretty jolly, and I scratched 'round for the
money. Got it, too, and wasn't I glad?”

Jack paused to rub his hands, and Frank said, with more than usual
respect,

“Couldn't you get hold of Jerry in any other place, and out of school
time? That did the mischief, thanks to Joe. I thrashed him, Jill--did I
mention it?”

“I couldn't get all my money till Friday morning, and I knew Jerry was
off at night. I looked for him before school, and at noon, but couldn't
find him, so afternoon recess was my last chance. I was bound to do it
and I didn't mean to break the rule, but Jerry was just going into the
shop, so I pelted after him, and as it was private business we went to
the billiard-room. I declare I never was so relieved as when I handed
over that money, and made him say it was all right, and he wouldn't go
near Bob. He's off, so my mind is easy, and Bob will be so grateful I
can keep him steady, perhaps. That will be worth two seventy-five, I
think,” said Jack heartily.

“You should have come to me,” began Frank.

“And got laughed at--no, thank you,” interrupted Jack, recollecting
several philanthropic little enterprises which were nipped in the bud
for want of co-operation.

“To me, then,” said his mother. “It would have saved so much trouble.”

“I thought of it, but Bob didn't want the big fellows to know for fear
they'd be down on him, so I thought he might not like me to tell grown
people. I don't mind the fuss now, and Bob is as kind as he can be.
Wanted to give me his big knife, but I wouldn't take it. I'd rather have
this,” and Jack put the letter in his pocket with a slap outside, as if
it warmed the cockles of his heart to have it there.

“Well, it seems rather like a tempest in a teapot, now it is all over,
but I do admire your pluck, little boy, in holding out so well when
every one was scolding at you, and you in the right all the time,” said
Frank, glad to praise, now that he honestly could, after his wholesale
condemnation.

“That is what pulled me through, I suppose. I used to think if I _had_
done anything wrong, that I couldn't stand the snubbing a day. I should
have told right off, and had it over. Now, I guess I'll have a good
report if you do tell Mr. Acton,” said Jack, looking at his mother so
wistfully, that she resolved to slip away that very evening, and make
sure that the thing was done.

“That will make you happier than anything else, won't it?” asked Jill,
eager to have him rewarded after his trials.

“There's one thing I like better, though I'd be very sorry to lose my
report. It's the fun of telling Ed I tried to do as he wanted us to, and
seeing how pleased he'll be,” added Jack, rather bashfully, for the boys
laughed at him sometimes for his love of this friend.

“I know he won't be any happier about it than someone else, who stood
by you all through, and set her bright wits to work till the trouble was
all cleared away,” said Mrs. Minot, looking at Jill's contented face, as
she lay smiling on them all.

Jack understood, and, hopping across the room, gave both the thin hands
a hearty shake; then, not finding any words quite cordial enough in
which to thank this faithful little sister, he stooped down and kissed
her gratefully.




Chapter XV. Saint Lucy


Saturday was a busy and a happy time to Jack, for in the morning Mr.
Acton came to see him, having heard the story overnight, and promised
to keep Bob's secret while giving Jack an acquittal as public as the
reprimand had been. Then he asked for the report which Jack had bravely
received the day before and put away without showing to anybody.

“There is one mistake here which we must rectify,” said Mr. Acton, as
he crossed out the low figures under the word “Behavior,” and put the
much-desired 100 there.

“But I did break the rule, sir,” said Jack, though his face glowed with
pleasure, for Mamma was looking on.

“I overlook that as I should your breaking into my house if you saw it
was on fire. You ran to save a friend, and I wish I could tell those
fellows why you were there. It would do them good. I am not going to
praise you, John, but I did believe you in spite of appearances, and
I am glad to have for a pupil a boy who loves his neighbor better than
himself.”

Then, having shaken hands heartily, Mr. Acton went away, and Jack
flew off to have rejoicings with Jill, who sat up on her sofa, without
knowing it, so eager was she to hear all about the call.

In the afternoon Jack drove his mother to the Captain's, confiding to
her on the way what a hard time he had when he went before, and how
nothing but the thought of cheering Bob kept him up when he slipped and
hurt his knee, and his boot sprung a leak, and the wind came up very
cold, and the hill seemed an endless mountain of mud and snow.

Mrs. Minot had such a gentle way of putting things that she would have
won over a much harder man than the strict old Captain, who heard the
story with interest, and was much pleased with the boys' efforts to keep
Bob straight. That young person dodged away into the barn with Jack, and
only appeared at the last minute to shove a bag of chestnuts into the
chaise. But he got a few kind words that did him good, from Mrs. Minot
and the Captain, and from that day felt himself under bonds to behave
well if he would keep their confidence.

“I shall give Jill the nuts; and I wish I had something she wanted very,
very much, for I do think she ought to be rewarded for getting me out of
the mess,” said Jack, as they drove happily home again.

“I hope to have something in a day or two that _will_ delight her very
much. I will say no more now, but keep my little secret and let it be a
surprise to all by and by,” answered his mother, looking as if she had
not much doubt about the matter.

“That will be jolly. You are welcome to your secret, Mamma. I've had
enough of them for one while;” and Jack shrugged his broad shoulders as
if a burden had been taken off.

In the evening Ed came, and Jack was quite satisfied when he saw how
pleased his friend was at what he had done.

“I never meant you should take so much trouble, only be kind to Bob,”
 said Ed, who did not know how strong his influence was, nor what a sweet
example of quiet well-doing his own life was to all his mates.

“I wished to be really useful; not just to talk about it and do nothing.
That isn't your way, and I want to be like you,” answered Jack, with
such affectionate sincerity that Ed could not help believing him, though
he modestly declined the compliment by saying, as he began to play
softly, “Better than I am, I hope. I don't amount to much.”

“Yes, you do! and if any one says you don't I'll shake him. I can't tell
what it is, only you always look so happy and contented--sort of sweet
and shiny,” said Jack, as he stroked the smooth brown head, rather at a
loss to describe the unusually fresh and sunny expression of Ed's face,
which was always cheerful, yet had a certain thoughtfulness that made it
very attractive to both young and old.

“Soap makes him shiny; I never saw such a fellow to wash and brush,” put
in Frank, as he came up with one of the pieces of music he and Ed were
fond of practising together.

“I don't mean that!” said Jack indignantly. “I wash and brush till you
call me a dandy, but I don't have the same look--it seems to come from
the inside, somehow, as if he was always jolly and clean and good in his
mind, you know.”

“Born so,” said Frank, rumbling away in the bass with a pair of hands
that would have been the better for some of the above-mentioned soap,
for he did not love to do much in the washing and brushing line.

“I suppose that's it. Well, I like it, and I shall keep on trying, for
being loved by every one is about the nicest thing in the world. Isn't
it, Ed?” asked Jack, with a gentle tweak of the ear as he put a question
which he knew would get no answer, for Ed was so modest he could not see
wherein he differed from other boys, nor believe that the sunshine he
saw in other faces was only the reflection from his own.

Sunday evening Mrs. Minot sat by the fire, planning how she should tell
some good news she had been saving up all day. Mrs. Pecq knew it, and
seemed so delighted that she went about smiling as if she did not know
what trouble meant, and could not do enough for the family. She was
downstairs now, seeing that the clothes were properly prepared for the
wash, so there was no one in the Bird Room but Mamma and the children.
Frank was reading up all he could find about some Biblical hero
mentioned in the day's sermon; Jill lay where she had lain for nearly
four long months, and though her face was pale and thin with the
confinement, there was an expression on it now sweeter even than health.
Jack sat on the rug beside her, looking at a white carnation through the
magnifying glass, while she was enjoying the perfume of a red one as she
talked to him.

“If you look at the white petals you'll see that they sparkle like
marble, and go winding a long way down to the middle of the flower
where it grows sort of rosy; and in among the small, curly leaves, like
fringed curtains, you can see the little green fairy sitting all alone.
Your mother showed me that, and I think it is very pretty. I call it a
'fairy,' but it is really where the seeds are hidden and the sweet smell
comes from.”

Jill spoke softly lest she should disturb the others, and, as she turned
to push up her pillow, she saw Mrs. Minot looking at her with a smile
she did not understand.

“Did you speak, 'm?” she asked, smiling back again, without in the least
knowing why.

“No, dear. I was listening and thinking what a pretty little story one
could make out of your fairy living alone down there, and only known by
her perfume.”

“Tell it, Mamma. It is time for our story, and that would be a nice one,
I guess,” said Jack, who was as fond of stories as when he sat in his
mother's lap and chuckled over the hero of the beanstalk.

“We don't have fairy tales on Sunday, you know,” began Jill regretfully.

“Call it a parable, and have a moral to it, then it will be all right,”
 put in Frank, as he shut his big book, having found what he wanted.

“I like stories about saints, and the good and wonderful things they
did,” said Jill, who enjoyed the wise and interesting bits Mrs. Minot
often found for her in grown-up books, for Jill had thoughtful times,
and asked questions which showed that she was growing fast in mind if
not in body.

“This is a true story; but I will disguise it a little, and call it 'The
Miracle of Saint Lucy,'” began Mrs. Minot, seeing a way to tell her good
news and amuse the children likewise.

Frank retired to the easy-chair, that he might sleep if the tale should
prove too childish for him. Jill settled herself among her cushions, and
Jack lay flat upon the rug, with his feet up, so that he could admire
his red slippers and rest his knee, which ached.

“Once upon a time there was a queen who had two princes.”

“Wasn't there a princess?” asked Jack, interested at once.

“No; and it was a great sorrow to the queen that she had no little
daughter, for the sons were growing up, and she was often very lonely.

“Like Snowdrop's mother,” whispered Jill.

“Now, don't keep interrupting, children, or we never shall get on,” said
Frank, more anxious to hear about the boys that were than the girl that
was not.

“One day, when the princes were out--ahem! we'll say hunting--they found
a little damsel lying on the snow, half dead with cold, they thought.
She was the child of a poor woman who lived in the forest--a wild little
thing, always dancing and singing about; as hard to catch as a squirrel,
and so fearless she would climb the highest trees, leap broad brooks, or
jump off the steep rocks to show her courage. The boys carried her home
to the palace, and the queen was glad to have her. She had fallen and
hurt herself, so she lay in bed week after week, with her mother to take
care of her--”

“That's you,” whispered Jack, throwing the white carnation at Jill, and
she threw back the red one, with her finger on her lips, for the tale
was very interesting now.

“She did not suffer much after a time, but she scolded and cried, and
could not be resigned, because she was a prisoner. The queen tried to
help her, but she could not do much; the princes were kind, but they had
their books and plays, and were away a good deal. Some friends she had
came often to see her, but still she beat her wings against the bars,
like a wild bird in a cage, and soon her spirits were all gone, and it
was sad to see her.”

“Where was your Saint Lucy? I thought it was about her,” asked Jack,
who did not like to have Jill's past troubles dwelt upon, since his were
not.

“She is coming. Saints are not born--they are made after many trials and
tribulations,” answered his mother, looking at the fire as if it
helped her to spin her little story. “Well, the poor child used to sing
sometimes to while away the long hours--sad songs mostly, and one among
them which the queen taught her was 'Sweet Patience, Come.'

“This she used to sing a great deal after a while, never dreaming that
Patience was an angel who could hear and obey. But it was so; and one
night, when the girl had lulled herself to sleep with that song, the
angel came. Nobody saw the lovely spirit with tender eyes, and a voice
that was like balm. No one heard the rustle of wings as she hovered over
the little bed and touched the lips, the eyes, the hands of the sleeper,
and then flew away, leaving three gifts behind. The girl did not know
why, but after that night the songs grew gayer, there seemed to be more
sunshine everywhere her eyes looked, and her hands were never tired of
helping others in various pretty, useful, or pleasant ways. Slowly the
wild bird ceased to beat against the bars, but sat in its cage and made
music for all in the palace, till the queen could not do without it,
the poor mother cheered up, and the princes called the girl their
nightingale.”

“Was that the miracle?” asked Jack, forgetting all about his slippers,
as he watched Jill's eyes brighten and the color come up in her white
cheeks.

“That was the miracle, and Patience can work far greater ones if you
will let her.”

“And the girl's name was Lucy?”

“Yes; they did not call her a saint then, but she was trying to be as
cheerful as a certain good woman she had heard of, and so the queen had
that name for her, though she did not let her know it for a long time.”

“That's not bad for a Sunday story, but there might have been more
about the princes, seems to me,” was Frank's criticism, as Jill lay
very still, trying to hide her face behind the carnation, for she had
no words to tell how touched and pleased she was to find that her little
efforts to be good had been seen, remembered, and now rewarded in this
way.

“There is more.”

“Then the story isn't done?” cried Jack.

“Oh dear, no; the most interesting things are to come, if you can wait
for them.”

“Yes, I see, this is the moral part. Now keep still, and let us have
the rest,” commanded Frank, while the others composed themselves for the
sequel, suspecting that it was rather nice, because Mamma's sober face
changed, and her eyes laughed as they looked at the fire.

“The elder prince was very fond of driving dragons, for the people of
that country used these fiery monsters as horses.”

“And got run away with, didn't he?” laughed Jack, adding, with great
interest, “What did the other fellow do?”

“He went about fighting other people's battles, helping the poor, and
trying to do good. But he lacked judgment, so he often got into trouble,
and was in such a hurry that he did not always stop to find out the
wisest way. As when he gave away his best coat to a beggar boy, instead
of the old one which he intended to give.”

“I say, that isn't fair, mother! Neither of them was new, and the boy
needed the best more than I did, and I wore the old one all winter,
didn't I?” asked Jack, who had rather exulted over Frank, and was now
taken down himself.

“Yes, you did, my dear; and it was not an easy thing for my dandiprat to
do. Now listen, and I'll tell you how they both learned to be wiser. The
elder prince soon found that the big dragons were too much for him, and
set about training his own little one, who now and then ran away with
him. Its name was Will, a good servant, but a bad master; so he learned
to control it, and in time this gave him great power over himself, and
fitted him to be a king over others.”

“Thank you, mother; I'll remember my part of the moral. Now give Jack
his,” said Frank, who liked the dragon episode, as he had been wrestling
with his own of late, and found it hard to manage.

“He had a fine example before him in a friend, and he followed it more
reasonably till he grew able to use wisely one of the best and noblest
gifts of God--benevolence.”

“Now tell about the girl. Was there more to that part of the story?”
 asked Jack, well pleased with his moral, as it took Ed in likewise.

“That is the best of all, but it seems as if I never should get to it.
After Patience made Lucy sweet and cheerful, she began to have a curious
power over those about her, and to work little miracles herself, though
she did not know it. The queen learned to love her so dearly she could
not let her go; she cheered up all her friends when they came with their
small troubles; the princes found bright eyes, willing hands, and a kind
heart always at their service, and felt, without quite knowing why, that
it was good for them to have a gentle little creature to care for; so
they softened their rough manners, loud voices, and careless ways, for
her sake, and when it was proposed to take her away to her own home they
could not give her up, but said she must stay longer, didn't they?”

“I'd like to see them saying anything else,” said Frank, while Jack sat
up to demand fiercely,--

“Who talks about taking Jill away?”

“Lucy's mother thought she ought to go, and said so, but the queen told
her how much good it did them all to have her there, and begged the
dear woman to let her little cottage and come and be housekeeper in the
palace, for the queen was getting lazy, and liked to sit and read, and
talk and sew with Lucy, better than to look after things.”

“And she said she would?” cried Jill, clasping her hands in her anxiety,
for she had learned to love her cage now.

“Yes.” Mrs. Minot had no time to say more, for one of the red slippers
flew up in the air, and Jack had to clap both hands over his mouth to
suppress the “hurrah!” that nearly escaped. Frank said, “That's good!”
 and nodded with his most cordial smile at Jill who pulled herself up
with cheeks now as rosy as the red carnation, and a little catch in her
breath as she said to herself,--

“It's too lovely to be true.”

“That's a first-rate end to a very good story,” began Jack, with grave
decision, as he put on his slipper and sat up to pat Jill's hand,
wishing it was not quite so like a little claw.

“That's not the end;” and Mamma's eyes laughed more than ever as three
astonished faces turned to her, and three voices cried out,--

“Still more?”

“The very best of all. You must know that, while Lucy was busy for
others, she was not forgotten, and when she was expecting to lie on her
bed through the summer, plans were being made for all sorts of pleasant
changes. First of all, she was to have a nice little brace to support
the back which was growing better every day; then, as the warm weather
came on, she was to go out, or lie on the piazza; and by and by, when
school was done, she was to go with the queen and the princes for a
month or two down to the sea-side, where fresh air and salt water were
to build her up in the most delightful way. There, now! isn't that the
best ending of all?” and Mamma paused to read her answer in the bright
faces of two of the listeners, for Jill hid hers in the pillow, and lay
quite still, as if it was too much for her.

“That will be regularly splendid! I'll row you all about--boating is so
much easier than riding, and I like it on salt water,” said Frank, going
to sit on the arm of the sofa, quite excited by the charms of the new
plan.

“And I'll teach you to swim, and roll you over the beach, and get
sea-weed and shells, and no end of nice things, and we'll all come home
as strong as lions,” added Jack, scrambling up as if about to set off at
once.

“The doctor says you have been doing finely of late, and the brace will
come to-morrow, and the first really mild day you are to have a breath
of fresh air. Won't that be good?” asked Mrs. Minot, hoping her story
had not been too interesting.

“Is she crying?” said Jack, much concerned as he patted the pillow in
his most soothing way, while Frank lifted one curl after another to see
what was hidden underneath.

Not tears, for two eyes sparkled behind the fingers, then the hands
came down like clouds from before the sun, and Jill's face shone out so
bright and happy it did one's heart good to see it.

“I'm not crying,” she said with a laugh which was fuller of blithe music
than any song she sung. “But it was so splendid, it sort of took my
breath away for a minute. I thought I wasn't any better, and never
should be, and I made up my mind I wouldn't ask, it would be so hard for
any one to tell me so. Now I see why the doctor made me stand up, and
told me to get my baskets ready to go a-Maying. I thought he was in fun;
did he really mean I could go?” asked Jill, expecting too much, for a
word of encouragement made her as hopeful as she had been despondent
before.

“No, dear, not so soon as that. It will be months, probably, before you
can walk and run, as you used to; but they will soon pass. You needn't
mind about May-day; it is always too cold for flowers, and you will
find more here among your own plants, than on the hills, to fill your
baskets,” answered Mrs. Minot, hastening to suggest something pleasant
to beguile the time of probation.

“I can wait. Months are not years, and if I'm truly getting well,
everything will seem beautiful and easy to me,” said Jill, laying
herself down again, with the patient look she had learned to wear, and
gathering up the scattered carnations to enjoy their spicy breath, as if
the fairies hidden there had taught her some of their sweet secrets.

“Dear little girl, it has been a long, hard trial for you, but it is
coming to an end, and I think you will find that it has not been time
wasted, I don't want you to be a saint quite yet, but I am sure a
gentler Jill will rise up from that sofa than the one who lay down there
in December.”

“How could I help growing better, when you were so good to me?” cried
Jill, putting up both arms, as Mrs. Minot went to take Frank's place,
and he retired to the fire, there to stand surveying the scene with calm
approval.

“You have done quite as much for us; so we are even. I proved that to
your mother, and she is going to let the little house and take care of
the big one for me, while I borrow you to keep me happy and make the
boys gentle and kind. That is the bargain, and we get the best of it,”
 said Mrs. Minot, looking well pleased, while Jack added, “That's so!”
 and Frank observed with an air of conviction, “We couldn't get on
without Jill, possibly.”

“Can I do all that? I didn't know I was of any use. I only tried to be
good and grateful, for there didn't seem to be anything else I could
do,” said Jill, wondering why they were all so fond of her.

“No real trying is ever in vain. It is like the spring rain, and flowers
are sure to follow in good time. The three gifts Patience gave Saint
Lucy were courage, cheerfulness, and love, and with these one can work
the sweetest miracles in the world, as you see,” and Mrs. Minot pointed
to the pretty room and its happy inmates.

“Am I really the least bit like that good Lucinda? I tried to be, but I
didn't think I was,” asked Jill softly.

“You are very like her in all ways but one. _She_ did not get well, and
_you_ will.”

A short answer, but it satisfied Jill to her heart's core, and that
night, when she lay in bed, she thought to herself: “How curious it is
that I've been a sort of missionary without knowing it! They all
love and thank me, and won't let me go, so I suppose I must have
done something, but I don't know what, except trying to be good and
pleasant.”

That was the secret, and Jill found it out just when it was most
grateful as a reward for past efforts, most helpful as an encouragement
toward the constant well-doing which can make even a little girl a joy
and comfort to all who know and love her.




Chapter XVI. Up at Merry's


“Now fly round, child, and get your sweeping done up smart and early.”

“Yes, mother.”

“I shall want you to help me about the baking, by and by.”

“Yes, mother.”

“Roxy is cleaning the cellar-closets, so you'll have to get the
vegetables ready for dinner. Father wants a boiled dish, and I shall be
so busy I can't see to it.”

“Yes, mother.”

A cheerful voice gave the three answers, but it cost Merry an effort to
keep it so, for she had certain little plans of her own which made the
work before her unusually distasteful. Saturday always was a trying day,
for, though she liked to see rooms in order, she hated to sweep, as no
speck escaped Mrs. Grant's eye, and only the good old-fashioned broom,
wielded by a pair of strong arms, was allowed. Baking was another trial:
she loved good bread and delicate pastry, but did not enjoy burning her
face over a hot stove, daubing her hands with dough, or spending hours
rolling out cookies for the boys; while a “boiled dinner” was her
especial horror, as it was not elegant, and the washing of vegetables
was a job she always shirked when she could.

However, having made up her mind to do her work without complaint, she
ran upstairs to put on her dust-cap, trying to look as if sweeping was
the joy of her life.

“It is such a lovely day, I did want to rake my garden, and have a walk
with Molly, and finish my book so I can get another,” she said with a
sigh, as she leaned out of the open window for a breath of the unusually
mild air.

Down in the ten-acre lot the boys were carting and spreading loam; out
in the barn her father was getting his plows ready; over the hill rose
the smoke of the distant factory, and the river that turned the wheels
was gliding through the meadows, where soon the blackbirds would be
singing. Old Bess pawed the ground, eager to be off; the gray hens
were scratching busily all about the yard; even the green things in the
garden were pushing through the brown earth, softened by April rains,
and there was a shimmer of sunshine over the wide landscape that made
every familiar object beautiful with hints of spring, and the activity
it brings.

Something made the old nursery hymn come into Merry's head, and humming
to herself,

  “In works of labor or of skill
  I would be busy too,”

she tied on her cap, shouldered her broom, and fell to work so
energetically that she soon swept her way through the chambers, down the
front stairs to the parlor door, leaving freshness and order behind her
as she went.

She always groaned when she entered that apartment, and got out of it
again as soon as possible, for it was, like most country parlors, a prim
and chilly place, with little beauty and no comfort. Black horse-hair
furniture, very slippery and hard, stood against the wall; the table had
its gift books, albums, worsted mat and ugly lamp; the mantel-piece its
china vases, pink shells, and clock that never went; the gay carpet was
kept distressingly bright by closed shutters six days out of the seven,
and a general air of go-to-meeting solemnity pervaded the room. Merry
longed to make it pretty and pleasant, but her mother would allow of no
change there, so the girl gave up her dreams of rugs and hangings, fine
pictures and tasteful ornaments, and dutifully aired, dusted, and shut
up this awful apartment once a week, privately resolving that, if she
ever had a parlor of her own, it should not be as dismal as a tomb.

The dining-room was a very different place, for here Merry had been
allowed to do as she liked, yet so gradual had been the change, that she
would have found it difficult to tell how it came about. It seemed to
begin with the flowers, for her father kept his word about the “posy
pots,” and got enough to make quite a little conservatory in the
bay-window, which was sufficiently large for three rows all round, and
hanging-baskets overhead. Being discouraged by her first failure, Merry
gave up trying to have things nice everywhere, and contented herself
with making that one nook so pretty that the boys called it her
“bower.” Even busy Mrs. Grant owned that plants were not so messy as she
expected, and the farmer was never tired of watching “little daughter”
 as she sat at work there, with her low chair and table full of books.

The lamp helped, also, for Merry set up her own, and kept it so well
trimmed that it burned clear and bright, shining on the green arch of
ivy overhead, and on the nasturtium vines framing the old glass, and
peeping at their gay little faces, and at the pretty young girl, so
pleasantly that first her father came to read his paper by it, then her
mother slipped in to rest on the lounge in the corner, and finally the
boys hovered about the door as if the “settin'-room” had grown more
attractive than the kitchen.

But the open fire did more than anything else to win and hold them all,
as it seldom fails to do when the black demon of an airtight stove is
banished from the hearth. After the room was cleaned till it shone,
Merry begged to have the brass andirons put in, and offered to keep them
as bright as gold if her mother would consent. So the great logs were
kindled, and the flames went dancing up the chimney as if glad to be set
free from their prison. It changed the whole room like magic, and no
one could resist the desire to enjoy its cheery comfort. The farmer's
three-cornered leathern chair soon stood on one side, and mother's
rocker on the other, as they toasted their feet and dozed or chatted in
the pleasant warmth.

The boys' slippers were always ready on the hearth; and when the big
boots were once off, they naturally settled down about the table, where
the tall lamp, with its pretty shade of pressed autumn leaves, burned
brightly, and the books and papers lay ready to their hands instead of
being tucked out of sight in the closet. They were beginning to see
that “Merry's notions” had some sense in them, since they were made
comfortable, and good-naturedly took some pains to please her in various
ways. Tom brushed his hair and washed his hands nicely before he came
to table. Dick tried to lower his boisterous laughter, and Harry never
smoked in the sitting-room. Even Roxy expressed her pleasure in seeing
“things kind of spruced up,” and Merry's gentle treatment of the
hard-working drudge won her heart entirely.

The girl was thinking of these changes as she watered her flowers,
dusted the furniture, and laid the fire ready for kindling; and, when
all was done, she stood a minute to enjoy the pleasant room, full of
spring sunshine, fresh air, and exquisite order. It seemed to give her
heart for more distasteful labors, and she fell to work at the pies as
cheerfully as if she liked it.

Mrs. Grant was flying about the kitchen, getting the loaves of brown and
white bread ready for the big oven. Roxy's voice came up from the cellar
singing “Bounding Billows,” with a swashing and scrubbing accompaniment
which suggested that she was actually enjoying a “life on the ocean
wave.” Merry, in her neat cap and apron, stood smiling over her work
as she deftly rolled and clipped, filled and covered, finding a certain
sort of pleasure in doing it well, and adding interest to it by crimping
the crust, making pretty devices with strips of paste and star-shaped
prickings of the fork.

“Good-will giveth skill,” says the proverb, and even particular Mrs.
Grant was satisfied when she paused to examine the pastry with her
experienced eye.

“You are a handy child and a credit to your bringing up, though I do say
it. Those are as pretty pies as I'd wish to eat, if they bake well, and
there's no reason why they shouldn't.”

“May I make some tarts or rabbits of these bits? The boys like them,
and I enjoy modelling this sort of thing,” said Merry, who was trying to
mould a bird, as she had seen Ralph do with clay to amuse Jill while the
bust was going on.

“No, dear; there's no time for knick-knacks to-day. The beets ought to
be on this minute. Run and get 'em, and be sure you scrape the carrots
well.”

Poor Merry put away the delicate task she was just beginning to like,
and taking a pan went down cellar, wishing vegetables could be grown
without earth, for she hated to put her hands in dirty water. A word of
praise to Roxy made that grateful scrubber leave her work to poke about
in the root-cellar, choosing “sech as was pretty much of a muchness,
else they wouldn't bile even;” so Merry was spared that part of the
job, and went up to scrape and wash without complaint, since it was for
father. She was repaid at noon by the relish with which he enjoyed his
dinner, for Merry tried to make even a boiled dish pretty by arranging
the beets, carrots, turnips, and potatoes in contrasting colors, with
the beef hidden under the cabbage leaves.

“Now, I'll rest and read for an hour, then I'll rake my garden, or run
down town to see Molly and get some seeds,” she thought to herself, as
she put away the spoons and glasses, which she liked to wash, that they
might always be clear and bright.

“If you've done all your own mending, there's a heap of socks to be
looked over. Then I'll show you about darning the tablecloths. I do hate
to have a stitch of work left over till Monday,” said Mrs. Grant, who
never took naps, and prided herself on sitting down to her needle at 3
P.M. every day.

“Yes, mother;” and Merry went slowly upstairs, feeling that a part of
Saturday ought to be a holiday after books and work all the week. As she
braided up her hair, her eye fell upon the reflection of her own face
in the glass. Not a happy nor a pretty one just then, and Merry was so
unaccustomed to seeing any other, that involuntarily the frown smoothed
itself out, the eyes lost their weary look, the drooping lips curved
into a smile, and, leaning her elbows on the bureau, she shook her head
at herself, saying, half aloud, as she glanced at Ivanhoe lying near,--

“You needn't look so cross and ugly just because you can't have what you
want. Sweeping, baking, and darning are not so bad as being plagued
with lovers and carried off and burnt at the stake, so I won't envy poor
Rebecca her jewels and curls and romantic times, but make the best of my
own.”

Then she laughed, and the bright face came back into the mirror, looking
like an old friend, and Merry went on dressing with care, for she
took pleasure in her own little charms, and felt a sense of comfort in
knowing that she could always have one pretty thing to look at if she
kept her own face serene and sweet. It certainly looked so as it bent
over the pile of big socks half an hour later, and brightened with each
that was laid aside. Her mother saw it, and, guessing why such wistful
glances went from clock to window, kindly shortened the task of
table-cloth darning by doing a good bit herself, before putting it into
Merry's hands.

She was a good and loving mother in spite of her strict ways, and knew
that it was better for her romantic daughter to be learning all the
housewifery lessons she could teach her, than to be reading novels,
writing verses, or philandering about with her head full of girlish
fancies, quite innocent in themselves, but not the stuff to live on.
So she wisely taught the hands that preferred to pick flowers, trim up
rooms and mould birds, to work well with needle, broom, and rolling-pin;
put a receipt-book before the eyes that loved to laugh and weep over
tender tales, and kept the young head and heart safe and happy with
wholesome duties, useful studies, and such harmless pleasures as girls
should love, instead of letting them waste their freshness in vague
longings, idle dreams, and frivolous pastimes.

But it was often hard to thwart the docile child, and lately she had
seemed to be growing up so fast that her mother began to feel a new sort
of tenderness for this sweet daughter, who was almost ready to take
upon herself the cares, as well as triumphs and delights, of maidenhood.
Something in the droop of the brown head, and the quick motion of the
busy hand with a little burn on it, made it difficult for Mrs. Grant
to keep Merry at work that day, and her eye watched the clock almost as
impatiently as the girl's, for she liked to see the young face brighten
when the hour of release came.

“What next?” asked Merry, as the last stitch was set, and she stifled a
sigh on hearing the clock strike four, for the sun was getting low, and
the lovely afternoon going fast.

“One more job, if you are not too tired for it. I want the receipt for
diet drink Miss Dawes promised me; would you like to run down and get it
for me, dear?”

“Yes, mother!” and that answer was as blithe as a robin's chirp, for
that was just where Merry wanted to go.

Away went thimble and scissors, and in five minutes away went Merry,
skipping down the hill without a care in the world, for a happy heart
sat singing within, and everything seemed full of beauty.

She had a capital time with Molly, called on Jill, did her shopping in
the village, and had just turned to walk up the hill, when Ralph Evans
came tramping along behind her, looking so pleased and proud about
something that she could not help asking what it was, for they were
great friends, and Merry thought that to be an artist was the most
glorious career a man could choose.

“I know you've got some good news,” she said, looking up at him as he
touched his hat and fell into step with her, seeming more contented than
before.

“I have, and was just coming up to tell you, for I was sure you would be
glad. It is only a hope, a chance, but it is so splendid I feel as if I
must shout and dance, or fly over a fence or two, to let off steam.”

“Do tell me, quick; have you got an order?” asked Merry, full of
interest at once, for artistic vicissitudes were very romantic, and she
liked to hear about them.

“I may go abroad in the autumn.”

“Oh, how lovely!”

“Isn't it? David German is going to spend a year in Rome, to finish a
statue, and wants me to go along. Grandma is willing, as cousin Maria
wants her for a long visit, so everything looks promising and I really
think I may go.”

“Won't it cost a great deal?” asked Merry, who, in spite of her little
elegancies, had a good deal of her thrifty mother's common sense.

“Yes; and I've got to earn it. But I can--I know I can, for I've saved
some, and I shall work like ten beavers all summer. I won't borrow if
I can help it, but I know someone who would lend me five hundred if I
wanted it;” and Ralph looked as eager and secure as if the earning of
twice that sum was a mere trifle when all the longing of his life was
put into his daily tasks.

“I wish I had it to give you. It must be so splendid to feel that you
can do great things if you only have the chance. And to travel, and see
all the lovely pictures and statues, and people and places in Italy. How
happy you must be!” and Merry's eyes had the wistful look they always
wore when she dreamed dreams of the world she loved to live in.

“I am--so happy that I'm afraid it never will happen. If I do go, I'll
write and tell you all about the fine sights, and how I get on. Would
you like me to?” asked Ralph, beginning enthusiastically and ending
rather bashfully, for he admired Merry very much, and was not quite sure
how this proposal would be received.

“Indeed I should! I'd feel so grand to have letters from Paris and
Rome, and you'd have so much to tell it would be almost as good as going
myself,” she said, looking off into the daffodil sky, as they paused
a minute on the hill-top to get breath, for both had walked as fast as
they talked.

“And will you answer the letters?” asked Ralph, watching the innocent
face, which looked unusually kind and beautiful to him in that soft
light.

“Why, yes; I'd love to, only I shall not have anything interesting to
say. What can I write about?” and Merry smiled as she thought how dull
her letters would sound after the exciting details his would doubtless
give.

“Write about yourself, and all the rest of the people I know. Grandma
will be gone, and I shall want to hear how you get on.” Ralph looked
very anxious indeed to hear, and Merry promised she would tell all
about the other people, adding, as she turned from the evening peace and
loveliness to the house, whence came the clatter of milk-pans and the
smell of cooking,--

“I never should have anything very nice to tell about myself, for I
don't do interesting things as you do, and you wouldn't care to hear
about school, and sewing, and messing round at home.”

Merry gave a disdainful little sniff at the savory perfume of ham which
saluted them, and paused with her hand on the gate, as if she found it
pleasanter out there than in the house. Ralph seemed to agree with her,
for, leaning on the gate, he lingered to say, with real sympathy in his
tone and something else in his face, “Yes, I should; so you write and
tell me all about it. I didn't know you had any worries, for you always
seemed like one of the happiest people in the world, with so many to pet
and care for you, and plenty of money, and nothing very hard or hateful
to do. You'd think you were well off if you knew as much about poverty
and work and never getting what you want, as I do.”

“You bear your worries so well that nobody knows you have them. I ought
not to complain, and I won't, for I do have all I need. I'm so glad you
are going to get what you want at last;” and Merry held out her hand to
say good-night, with so much pleasure in her face that Ralph could not
make up his mind to go just yet.

“I shall have to scratch round in a lively way before I do get it, for
David says a fellow can't live on less than four or five hundred a year,
even living as poor artists have to, in garrets and on crusts. I don't
mind as long as Grandma is all right. She is away to-night, or I should
not be here,” he added, as if some excuse was necessary. Merry needed no
hint, for her tender heart was touched by the vision of her friend in
a garret, and she suddenly rejoiced that there was ham and eggs for
supper, so that he might be well fed once, at least, before he went away
to feed on artistic crusts.

“Being here, come in and spend the evening. The boys will like to hear
the news, and so will father. Do, now.”

It was impossible to refuse the invitation he had been longing for, and
in they went to the great delight of Roxy, who instantly retired to the
pantry, smiling significantly, and brought out the most elaborate pie in
honor of the occasion. Merry touched up the table, and put a little vase
of flowers in the middle to redeem the vulgarity of doughnuts. Of course
the boys upset it, but as there was company nothing was said, and Ralph
devoured his supper with the appetite of a hungry boy, while watching
Merry eat bread and cream out of an old-fashioned silver porringer, and
thinking it the sweetest sight he ever beheld.

Then the young people gathered about the table, full of the new plans,
and the elders listened as they rested after the week's work. A pleasant
evening, for they all liked Ralph, but as the parents watched Merry
sitting among the great lads like a little queen among her subjects,
half unconscious as yet of the power in her hands, they nodded to one
another, and then shook their heads as if they said,--

“I'm afraid the time is coming, mother.”

“No danger as long as she don't know it, father.”

At nine the boys went off to the barn, the farmer to wind up the
eight-day clock, and the housewife to see how the baked beans and Indian
pudding for to-morrow were getting on in the oven. Ralph took up his hat
to go, saying as he looked at the shade on the tall student lamp,--

“What a good light that gives! I can see it as I go home every night,
and it burns up here like a beacon. I always look for it, and it hardly
ever fails to be burning. Sort of cheers up the way, you know, when I'm
tired or low in my mind.”

“Then I'm very glad I got it. I liked the shape, but the boys laughed
at it as they did at my bulrushes in a ginger-jar over there. I'd been
reading about 'household art,' and I thought I'd try a little,” answered
Merry, laughing at her own whims.

“You've got a better sort of household art, I think, for you make people
happy and places pretty, without fussing over it. This room is ever so
much improved every time I come, though I hardly see what it is except
the flowers,” said Ralph, looking from the girl to the tall calla that
bent its white cup above her as if to pour its dew upon her head.

“Isn't that lovely? I tried to draw it--the shape was so graceful I
wanted to keep it. But I couldn't. Isn't it a pity such beautiful things
won't last forever?” and Merry looked regretfully at the half-faded one
that grew beside the fresh blossom.

“I can keep it for you. It would look well in plaster. May I?” asked
Ralph.

“Thank you, I should like that very much. Take the real one as a
model--please do; there are more coming, and this will brighten up your
room for a day or two.”

As she spoke, Merry cut the stem, and, adding two or three of the great
green leaves, put the handsome flower in his hand with so much good-will
that he felt as if he had received a very precious gift. Then he said
good-night so gratefully that Merry's hand quite tingled with the grasp
of his, and went away, often looking backward through the darkness to
where the light burned brightly on the hill-top--the beacon kindled by
an unconscious Hero for a young Leander swimming gallantly against wind
and tide toward the goal of his ambition.




Chapter XVII. Down at Molly's


“Now, my dears, I've something very curious to tell you, so listen
quietly and then I'll give you your dinners,” said Molly, addressing the
nine cats who came trooping after her as she went into the shed-chamber
with a bowl of milk and a plate of scraps in her hands. She had taught
them to behave well at meals, so, though their eyes glared and their
tails quivered with impatience, they obeyed; and when she put the food
on a high shelf and retired to the big basket, the four old cats sat
demurely down before her, while the five kits scrambled after her and
tumbled into her lap, as if hoping to hasten the desired feast by their
innocent gambols.

Granny, Tobias, Mortification, and Molasses were the elders. Granny, a
gray old puss, was the mother and grandmother of all the rest. Tobias
was her eldest son, and Mortification his brother, so named because he
had lost his tail, which affliction depressed his spirits and cast a
blight over his young life. Molasses was a yellow cat, the mamma of four
of the kits, the fifth being Granny's latest darling. Toddlekins, the
little aunt, was the image of her mother, and very sedate even at that
early age; Miss Muffet, so called from her dread of spiders, was a timid
black and white kit; Beauty, a pretty Maltese, with a serene little face
and pink nose; Ragbag, a funny thing, every color that a cat could be;
and Scamp, who well deserved his name, for he was the plague of Miss
Bat's life, and Molly's especial pet.

He was now perched on her shoulder, and, as she talked, kept peeping
into her face or biting her ear in the most impertinent way, while the
others sprawled in her lap or promenaded round the basket rim.

“My friends, something very remarkable has happened: Miss Bat is
cleaning house!” and, having made this announcement, Molly leaned back
to see how the cats received it, for she insisted that they understood
all she said to them.

Tobias stared, Mortification lay down as if it was too much for him,
Molasses beat her tail on the floor as if whipping a dusty carpet, and
Granny began to purr approvingly. The giddy kits paid no attention, as
they did not know what house-cleaning meant, happy little dears!

“I thought you'd like it, Granny, for you are a decent cat, and know
what is proper,” continued Molly, leaning down to stroke the old puss,
who blinked affectionately at her. “I can't imagine what put it into
Miss Bat's head. I never said a word, and gave up groaning over the
clutter, as I couldn't mend it. I just took care of Boo and myself, and
left her to be as untidy as she pleased, and she is a regular old----”

Here Scamp put his paw on her lips because he saw them moving, but it
seemed as if it was to check the disrespectful word just coming out.

“Well, I won't call names; but what shall I do when I see everything in
confusion, and she won't let me clear up?” asked Molly, looking round at
Scamp, who promptly put the little paw on her eyelid, as if the roll of
the blue ball underneath amused him.

“Shut my eyes to it, you mean? I do all I can, but it is hard, when I
wish to be nice, and do try; don't I?” asked Molly. But Scamp was ready
for her, and began to comb her hair with both paws as he stood on his
hind legs to work so busily that Molly laughed and pulled him down,
saying, as she cuddled the sly kit.

“You sharp little thing! I know my hair is not neat now, for I've been
chasing Boo round the garden to wash him for school. Then Miss Bat threw
the parlor carpet out of the window, and I was so surprised I had to run
and tell you. Now, what had we better do about it?”

The cats all winked at her, but no one had any advice to offer, except
Tobias, who walked to the shelf, and, looking up, uttered a deep,
suggestive yowl, which said as plainly as words, “Dinner first and
discussion afterward.”

“Very well, don't scramble,” said Molly, getting up to feed her pets.
First the kits, who rushed at the bowl and thrust their heads in,
lapping as if for a wager; then the cats, who each went to one of the
four piles of scraps laid round at intervals and placidly ate their
meat; while Molly retired to the basket, to ponder over the phenomena
taking place in the house.

She could not imagine what had started the old lady. It was not the
example of her neighbors, who had beaten carpets and scrubbed paint
every spring for years without exciting her to any greater exertion
than cleaning a few windows and having a man to clear away the rubbish
displayed when the snow melted. Molly never guessed that her own efforts
were at the bottom of the change, or knew that a few words not meant for
her ear had shamed Miss Bat into action. Coming home from prayer-meeting
one dark night, she trotted along behind two old ladies who were
gossiping in loud voices, as one was rather deaf, and Miss Bat was both
pleased and troubled to hear herself unduly praised.

“I always said Sister Dawes meant well; but she's getting into years,
and the care of two children is a good deal for her, with her cooking
and her rheumatiz. I don't deny she did neglect 'em for a spell, but
she does well by 'em now, and I wouldn't wish to see better-appearing
children.”

“You've no idee how improved Molly is. She came in to see my girls, and
brought her sewing-work, shirts for the boy, and done it as neat and
capable as you'd wish to see. She always was a smart child, but dreadful
careless,” said the other old lady, evidently much impressed by the
change in harum-scarum Molly Loo.

“Being over to Mis Minot's so much has been good for her, and up to Mis
Grant's. Girls catch neat ways as quick as they do untidy ones, and them
wild little tykes often turn out smart women.”

“Sister Dawes _has_ done well by them children, and I hope Mr. Bemis
sees it. He ought to give her something comfortable to live on when she
can't do for him any longer. He can well afford it.”

“I haven't a doubt he will. He's a lavish man when he starts to do a
thing, but dreadful unobserving, else he'd have seen to matters long
ago. Them children was town-talk last fall, and I used to feel as if it
was my bounden duty to speak to Miss Dawes. But I never did, fearing I
might speak too plain, and hurt her feelings.”

“You've spoken plain enough now, and I'm beholden to you, though you'll
never know it,” said Miss Bat to herself, as she slipped into her own
gate, while the gossips trudged on quite unconscious of the listener
behind them.

Miss Bat was a worthy old soul in the main, only, like so many of us,
she needed rousing up to her duty. She had got the rousing now, and
it did her good, for she could not bear to be praised when she had not
deserved it. She had watched Molly's efforts with lazy interest, and
when the girl gave up meddling with her affairs, as she called the
housekeeping, Miss Bat ceased to oppose her, and let her scrub Boo, mend
clothes, and brush her hair as much as she liked. So Molly had worked
along without any help from her, running in to Mrs. Pecq for advice, to
Merry for comfort, or Mrs. Minot for the higher kind of help one often
needs so much. Now Miss Bat found that she was getting the credit and
the praise belonging to other people, and it stirred her up to try and
deserve a part at least.

“Molly don't want any help about her work or the boy: it's too late for
that; but if this house don't get a spring cleaning that will make it
shine, my name ain't Bathsheba Dawes,” said the old lady, as she
put away her bonnet that night, and laid energetic plans for a grand
revolution, inspired thereto not only by shame, but by the hint that
“Mr. Bemis was a lavish man,” as no one knew better than she.

Molly's amazement next day at seeing carpets fly out of window, ancient
cobwebs come down, and long-undisturbed closets routed out to the great
dismay of moths and mice, has been already confided to the cats, and as
she sat there watching them lap and gnaw, she said to herself,--

“I don't understand it, but as she never says much to me about my
affairs, I won't take any notice till she gets through, then I'll admire
everything all I can. It is so pleasant to be praised after you've been
trying hard.”

She might well say that, for she got very little herself, and her trials
had been many, her efforts not always successful, and her reward seemed
a long way off. Poor Boo could have sympathized with her, for he had
suffered much persecution from his small schoolmates when he appeared
with large gray patches on the little brown trousers, where he had worn
them out coasting down those too fascinating steps. As he could not
see the patches himself, he fancied them invisible, and came home much
afflicted by the jeers of his friends. Then Molly tried to make him a
new pair out of a sack of her own; but she cut both sides for the same
leg, so one was wrong side out. Fondly hoping no one would observe it,
she sewed bright buttons wherever they could be put, and sent confiding
Boo away in a pair of blue trousers, which were absurdly hunchy behind
and buttony before. He came home heart-broken and muddy, having been
accidentally tipped into a mud-puddle by two bad boys who felt that such
tailoring was an insult to mankind. That roused Molly's spirit, and she
begged her father to take the boy and have him properly fitted out,
as he was old enough now to be well-dressed, and she wouldn't have him
tormented. His attention being called to the trousers, Mr. Bemis had a
good laugh over them, and then got Boo a suit which caused him to be the
admired of all observers, and to feel as proud as a little peacock.

Cheered by this success, Molly undertook a set of small shirts, and
stitched away bravely, though her own summer clothes were in a sad
state, and for the first time in her life she cared about what she
should wear.

“I must ask Merry, and may be father will let me go with her and her
mother when they do their shopping, instead of leaving it to Miss
Bat, who dresses me like an old woman. Merry knows what is pretty and
becoming: I don't,” thought Molly, meditating in the bushel basket, with
her eyes on her snuff-colored gown and the dark purple bow at the end of
the long braid Muffet had been playing with.

Molly was beginning to see that even so small a matter as the choice of
colors made a difference in one's appearance, and to wonder why Merry
always took such pains to have a blue tie for the gray dress, a rosy one
for the brown, and gloves that matched her bonnet ribbons. Merry never
wore a locket outside her sack, a gay bow in her hair and soiled cuffs,
a smart hat and the braid worn off her skirts. She was exquisitely neat
and simple, yet always looked well-dressed and pretty; for her love of
beauty taught her what all girls should learn as soon as they begin
to care for appearances--that neatness and simplicity are their best
ornaments, that good habits are better than fine clothes, and the most
elegant manners are the kindest.

All these thoughts were dancing through Molly's head, and when she left
her cats, after a general romp in which even decorous Granny allowed her
family to play leap-frog over her respectable back, she had made up
her mind not to have yellow ribbons on her summer hat if she got a pink
muslin as she had planned, but to finish off Boo's last shirt before she
went shopping with Merry.

It rained that evening, and Mr. Bemis had a headache, so he threw
himself down upon the lounge after tea for a nap, with his silk
handkerchief spread over his face. He did get a nap, and when he waked
he lay for a time drowsily listening to the patter of the rain, and
another sound which was even more soothing. Putting back a corner of the
handkerchief to learn what it was, he saw Molly sitting by the fire with
Boo in her lap, rocking and humming as she warmed his little bare feet,
having learned to guard against croup by attending to the damp shoes
and socks before going to bed. Boo lay with his round face turned up to
hers, stroking her cheek while the sleepy blue eyes blinked lovingly at
her as she sang her lullaby with a motherly patience sweet to see. They
made a pretty little picture, and Mr. Bemis looked at it with pleasure,
having a leisure moment in which to discover, as all parents do sooner
or later, that his children were growing up.

“Molly is getting to be quite a woman, and very like her mother,”
 thought papa, wiping the eye that peeped, for he had been fond of the
pretty wife who died when Boo was born. “Sad loss to them, poor things!
But Miss Bat seems to have done well by them. Molly is much improved,
and the boy looks finely. She's a good soul, after all;” and Mr. Bemis
began to think he had been hasty when he half made up his mind to get
a new housekeeper, feeling that burnt steak, weak coffee, and ragged
wristbands were sure signs that Miss Bat's days of usefulness were over.

Molly was singing the lullaby her mother used to sing to her, and her
father listened to it silently till Boo was carried away too sleepy for
anything but bed. When she came back she sat down to her work, fancying
her father still asleep. She had a crimson bow at her throat and one on
the newly braided hair, her cuffs were clean, and a white apron hid the
shabbiness of the old dress. She looked like a thrifty little housewife
as she sat with her basket beside her full of neat white rolls, her
spools set forth, and a new pair of scissors shining on the table. There
was a sort of charm in watching the busy needle flash to and fro, the
anxious pucker of the forehead as she looked to see if the stitches were
even, and the expression of intense relief upon her face as she surveyed
the finished button-hole with girlish satisfaction. Her father was wide
awake and looking at her, thinking, as he did so,--

“Really the old lady has worked well to change my tomboy into that nice
little girl: I wonder how she did it.” Then he gave a yawn, pulled off
the handkerchief, and said aloud, “What are you making, Molly?” for it
struck him that sewing was a new amusement.

“Shirts for Boo, sir. Four, and this is the last,” she answered, with
pardonable pride, as she held it up and nodded toward the pile in her
basket.

“Isn't that a new notion? I thought Miss Bat did the sewing,” said Mr.
Bemis, as he smiled at the funny little garment, it looked so like Boo
himself.

“No, sir; only yours. I do mine and Boo's. At least, I'm learning how,
and Mrs. Pecq says I get on nicely,” answered Molly, threading her
needle and making a knot in her most capable way.

“I suppose it is time you did learn, for you are getting to be a great
girl, and all women should know how to make and mend. You must take a
stitch for me now and then: Miss Bat's eyes are not what they were,
I find;” and Mr. Bemis looked at his frayed wristband, as if he
particularly felt the need of a stitch just then.

“I'd love to, and I guess I could. I can mend gloves; Merry taught me,
so I'd better begin on them, if you have any,” said Molly, much pleased
at being able to do anything for her father, and still more so at being
asked.

“There's something to start with;” and he threw her a pair, with nearly
every finger ripped.

Molly shook her head over them, but got out her gray silk and fell to
work, glad to show how well she could sew.

“What are you smiling about?” asked her father, after a little pause,
for his head felt better, and it amused him to question Molly.

“I was thinking about my summer clothes. I must get them before long,
and I'd like to go with Mrs. Grant and learn how to shop, if you are
willing.”

“I thought Miss Bat did that for you.”

“She always has, but she gets ugly, cheap things that I don't like. I
think I am old enough to choose myself, if there is someone to tell me
about prices and the goodness of the stuff. Merry does; and she is only
a few months older than I am.”

“How old are you, child?” asked her father, feeling as if he had lost
his reckoning.

“Fifteen in August;” and Molly looked very proud of the fact.

“So you are! Bless my heart, how the time goes! Well, get what you
please; if I'm to have a young lady here, I'd like to have her prettily
dressed. It won't offend Miss Bat, will it?”

Molly's eyes sparkled, but she gave a little shrug as she answered, “She
won't care. She never troubles herself about me if I let her alone.

“Hey? what? Not trouble herself? If _she_ doesn't, who does?” and Mr.
Bemis sat up as if this discovery was more surprising than the other.

“I take care of myself and Boo, and she looks after you. The house goes
any way.”

“I should think so! I nearly broke my neck over the parlor sofa in the
hall to-night. What is it there for?”

Molly laughed. “That's the joke, sir, Miss Bat is cleaning house, and
I'm sure it needs cleaning, for it is years since it was properly done.
I thought you might have told her to.”

“I've said nothing. Don't like house-cleaning well enough to suggest it.
I did think the hall was rather dirty when I dropped my coat and took it
up covered with lint. Is she going to upset the whole place?” asked Mr.
Bemis, looking alarmed at the prospect.

“I hope so, for I really am ashamed when people come, to have them see
the dust and cobwebs, and old carpets and dirty windows,” said Molly,
with a sigh, though she never had cared a bit till lately.

“Why don't you dust round a little, then? No time to spare from the
books and play?”

“I tried, father, but Miss Bat didn't like it, and it was too hard for
me alone. If things were once in nice order, I think I could keep them
so; for I do want to be neat, and I'm learning as fast as I can.”

“It is high time someone took hold, if matters are left as you say. I've
just been thinking what a clever woman Miss Bat was, to make such a tidy
little girl out of what I used to hear called the greatest tomboy in
town, and wondering what I could give the old lady. Now I find _you_ are
the one to be thanked, and it is a very pleasant surprise to me.”

“Give her the present, please; I'm satisfied, if you like what I've
done. It isn't much, and I didn't know as you would ever observe any
difference. But I did try, and now I guess I'm really getting on,” said
Molly, sewing away with a bright color in her cheeks, for she, too,
found it a pleasant surprise to be praised after many failures and few
successes.

“You certainly are, my dear. I'll wait till the house-cleaning is
over, and then, if we are all alive, I'll see about Miss Bat's reward.
Meantime, you go with Mrs. Grant and get whatever you and the boy need,
and send the bills to me;” and Mr. Bemis lighted a cigar, as if that
matter was settled.

“Oh, thank you, sir! That will be splendid. Merry always has pretty
things, and I know you will like me when I get fixed,” said Molly,
smoothing down her apron, with a little air.

“Seems to me you look very well as you are. Isn't that a pretty enough
frock?” asked Mr. Bemis, quite unconscious that his own unusual interest
in his daughter's affairs made her look so bright and winsome.

“This? Why, father, I've worn it all winter, and it's _frightfully_
ugly, and almost in rags. I asked you for a new one a month ago, and you
said you'd 'see about it'; but you didn't, so I patched this up as well
as I could;” and Molly showed her elbows, feeling that such masculine
blindness as this deserved a mild reproof.

“Too bad! Well, go and get half a dozen pretty muslin and gingham
things, and be as gay as a butterfly, to make up for it,” laughed her
father, really touched by the patches and Molly's resignation to the
unreliable “I'll see about it,” which he recognized as a household word.

Molly clapped her hands, old gloves and all, exclaiming, with girlish
delight, “How nice it will seem to have a plenty of new, neat dresses
all at once, and be like other girls! Miss Bat always talks about
economy, and has no more taste than a--caterpillar.” Molly meant to say
“cat,” but remembering her pets, spared them the insult.

“I think I can afford to dress my girl as well as Grant does his. Get
a new hat and coat, child, and any little notions you fancy. Miss Bat's
economy isn't the sort I like;” and Mr. Bemis looked at his wristbands
again, as if he could sympathize with Molly's elbows.

“At this rate, I shall have more clothes than I know what to do with,
after being a rag-bag,” thought the girl, in great glee, as she bravely
stitched away at the worst glove, while her father smoked silently for a
while, feeling that several little matters had escaped his eye which he
really ought to “see about.”

Presently he went to his desk, but not to bury himself in business
papers, as usual, for, after rummaging in several drawers, he took out
a small bunch of keys, and sat looking at them with an expression only
seen on his face when he looked up at the portrait of a dark-eyed woman
hanging in his room. He was a very busy man, but he had a tender place
in his heart for his children; and when a look, a few words, a moment's
reflection, called his attention to the fact that his little girl was
growing up, he found both pride and pleasure in the thought that this
young daughter was trying to fill her mother's place, and be a comfort
to him, if he would let her.

“Molly, my dear, here is something for you,” he said; and when she stood
beside him, added, as he put the keys into her hand, keeping both in his
own for a minute,--

“Those are the keys to your mother's things. I always meant you to have
them, when you were old enough to use or care for them. I think you'll
fancy this better than any other present, for you are a good child, and
very like her.”

Something seemed to get into his throat there, and Molly put her arm
round his neck, saying, with a little choke in her own voice, “Thank
you, father, I'd rather have this than anything else in the world, and
I'll try to be more like her every day, for your sake.”

He kissed her, then said, as he began to stir his papers about, “I
must write some letters. Run off to bed, child. Good-night, my dear,
good-night.”

Seeing that he wanted to be alone, Molly slipped away, feeling that she
had received a very precious gift; for she remembered the dear, dead
mother, and had often longed to possess the relics laid away in the one
room where order reigned and Miss Bat had no power to meddle. As she
slowly undressed, she was not thinking of the pretty new gowns in which
she was to be “as gay as a butterfly,” but of the half-worn garments
waiting for her hands to unfold with a tender touch; and when she fell
asleep, with the keys under her pillow and her arms round Boo, a few
happy tears on her cheeks seemed to show that, in trying to do the duty
which lay nearest her, she had earned a very sweet reward.

So the little missionaries succeeded better in their second attempt than
in their first; for, though still very far from being perfect girls,
each was slowly learning, in her own way, one of the three lessons all
are the better for knowing--that cheerfulness can change misfortune into
love and friends; that in ordering one's self aright one helps others to
do the same; and that the power of finding beauty in the humblest things
makes home happy and life lovely.




Chapter XVIII. May Baskets


Spring was late that year, but to Jill it seemed the loveliest she had
ever known, for hope was growing green and strong in her own little
heart, and all the world looked beautiful. With the help of the brace
she could sit up for a short time every day, and when the air was mild
enough she was warmly wrapped and allowed to look out at the open window
into the garden, where the gold and purple crocuses were coming bravely
up, and the snowdrops nodded their delicate heads as if calling to
her,--

“Good day, little sister, come out and play with us, for winter is over
and spring is here.”

“I wish I could!” thought Jill, as the soft wind kissed a tinge of color
into her pale cheeks. “Never mind, they have been shut up in a darker
place than I for months, and had no fun at all; I won't fret, but think
about July and the seashore while I work.”

The job now in hand was May baskets, for it was the custom of the
children to hang them on the doors of their friends the night before
May-day; and the girls had agreed to supply baskets if the boys would
hunt for flowers, much the harder task of the two. Jill had more leisure
as well as taste and skill than the other girls, so she amused herself
with making a goodly store of pretty baskets of all shapes, sizes, and
colors, quite confident that they would be filled, though not a flower
had shown its head except a few hardy dandelions, and here and there a
small cluster of saxifrage.

The violets would not open their blue eyes till the sunshine was warmer,
the columbines refused to dance with the boisterous east wind, the ferns
kept themselves rolled up in their brown flannel jackets, and little
Hepatica, with many another spring beauty, hid away in the woods, afraid
to venture out, in spite of the eager welcome awaiting them. But the
birds had come, punctual as ever, and the bluejays were screaming in
the orchard, robins were perking up their heads and tails as they went
house-hunting, purple finches in their little red hoods were feasting
on the spruce buds, and the faithful chip birds chirped gayly on the
grapevine trellis where they had lived all winter, warming their little
gray breasts against the southern side of the house when the sun shone,
and hiding under the evergreen boughs when the snow fell.

“That tree is a sort of bird's hotel,” said Jill, looking out at the
tall spruce before her window, every spray now tipped with a soft green.
“They all go there to sleep and eat, and it has room for every one. It
is green when other trees die, the wind can't break it, and the snow
only makes it look prettier. It sings to me, and nods as if it knew I
loved it.”

“We might call it 'The Holly Tree Inn,' as some of the cheap
eating-houses for poor people are called in the city, as my holly bush
grows at its foot for a sign. You can be the landlady, and feed your
feathery customers every day, till the hard times are over,” said Mrs.
Minot, glad to see the child's enjoyment of the outer world from which
she had been shut so long.

Jill liked the fancy, and gladly strewed crumbs on the window ledge
for the chippies, who came confidingly to eat almost from her hand.
She threw out grain for the handsome jays, the jaunty robins, and the
neighbors' doves, who came with soft flight to trip about on their pink
feet, arching their shining necks as they cooed and pecked. Carrots
and cabbage-leaves also flew out of the window for the marauding gray
rabbit, last of all Jack's half-dozen, who led him a weary life of it
because they would _not_ stay in the Bunny-house, but undermined the
garden with their burrows, ate the neighbors' plants, and refused to
be caught till all but one ran away, to Jack's great relief. This old
fellow camped out for the winter, and seemed to get on very well among
the cats and the hens, who shared their stores with him, and he might
be seen at all hours of the day and night scampering about the place, or
kicking up his heels by moonlight, for he was a desperate poacher.

Jill took great delight in her pretty pensioners, who soon learned to
love “The Holly Tree Inn,” and to feel that the Bird Room held a caged
comrade; for, when it was too cold or wet to open the windows, the doves
came and tapped at the pane, the chippies sat on the ledge in plump
little bunches as if she were their sunshine, the jays called her in
their shrill voices to ring the dinner-bell, and the robins tilted on
the spruce boughs where lunch was always to be had.

The first of May came on Sunday, so all the celebrating must be done on
Saturday, which happily proved fair, though too chilly for muslin gowns,
paper garlands, and picnics on damp grass. Being a holiday, the boys
decided to devote the morning to ball and the afternoon to the flower
hunt, while the girls finished the baskets; and in the evening our
particular seven were to meet at the Minots to fill them, ready for the
closing frolic of hanging on door-handles, ringing bells, and running
away.

“Now I must do my Maying, for there will be no more sunshine, and I want
to pick my flowers before it is dark. Come, Mammy, you go too,” said
Jill, as the last sunbeams shone in at the western window where her
hyacinths stood that no fostering ray might be lost.

It was rather pathetic to see the once merry girl who used to be the
life of the wood-parties now carefully lifting herself from the couch,
and, leaning on her mother's strong arm, slowly take the half-dozen
steps that made up her little expedition. But she was happy, and stood
smiling out at old Bun skipping down the walk, the gold-edged clouds
that drew apart so that a sunbeam might give her a good-night kiss as
she gathered her long-cherished daisies, primroses, and hyacinths to
fill the pretty basket in her hand.

“Who is it for, my dearie?” asked her mother, standing behind her as
a prop, while the thin fingers did their work so willingly that not a
flower was left.

“For My Lady, of course. Who else would I give my posies to, when I love
them so well?” answered Jill, who thought no name too fine for their
best friend.

“I fancied it would be for Master Jack,” said her mother, wishing the
excursion to be a cheerful one.

“I've another for him, but _she_ must have the prettiest. He is going to
hang it for me, and ring and run away, and she won't know who it's from
till she sees this. She will remember it, for I've been turning and
tending it ever so long, to make it bloom to-day. Isn't it a beauty?”
 and Jill held up her finest hyacinth, which seemed to ring its pale
pink bells as if glad to carry its sweet message from a grateful little
heart.

“Indeed it is; and you are right to give your best to her. Come away
now, you must not stand any longer. Come and rest while I fetch a dish
to put the flowers in till you want them;” and Mrs. Pecq turned her
round with her small Maying safely done.

“I didn't think I'd ever be able to do even so much, and here I am
walking and sitting up, and going to drive some day. Isn't it nice that
I'm not to be a poor Lucinda after all?” and Jill drew a long sigh of
relief that six months instead of twenty years would probably be the end
of her captivity.

“Yes, thank Heaven! I don't think I _could_ have borne that;” and the
mother took Jill in her arms as if she were a baby, holding her close
for a minute, and laying her down with a tender kiss that made the arms
cling about her neck as her little girl returned it heartily, for all
sorts of new, sweet feelings seemed to be budding in both, born of great
joy and thankfulness.

Then Mrs. Pecq hurried away to see about tea for the hungry boys, and
Jill watched the pleasant twilight deepen as she lay singing to herself
one of the songs her friend taught her because it fitted her so well.

  “A little bird I am,
  Shut from the fields of air,
  And in my cage I sit and sing
  To Him who placed me there:
  Well pleased a prisoner to be,
  Because, my God, it pleases Thee!

  “Naught have I else to do;
  I sing the whole day long;
  And He whom most I love to please
  Doth listen to my song,
  He caught and bound my wandering wing,
  But still He bends to hear me sing.”

“Now we are ready for you, so bring on your flowers,” said Molly to the
boys, as she and Merry added their store of baskets to the gay show Jill
had set forth on the long table ready for the evening's work.

“They wouldn't let me see one, but I guess they have had good luck,
they look so jolly,” answered Jill, looking at Gus, Frank, and Jack, who
stood laughing, each with a large basket in his hands.

“Fair to middling. Just look in and see;” with which cheerful remark Gus
tipped up his basket and displayed a few bits of green at the bottom.

“I did better. Now, don't all scream at once over these beauties;” and
Frank shook out some evergreen sprigs, half a dozen saxifrages, and two
or three forlorn violets with hardly any stems.

“I don't brag, but here's the best of all the three,” chuckled Jack,
producing a bunch of feathery carrot-tops, with a few half-shut
dandelions trying to look brave and gay.

“Oh, boys, is that all?”

“What _shall_ we do?”

“We've only a few house-flowers, and all those baskets to fill,” cried
the girls, in despair; for Merry's contribution had been small, and
Molly had only a handful of artificial flowers “to fill up,” she said.

“It isn't our fault: it is the late spring. We can't make flowers, can
we?” asked Frank, in a tone of calm resignation.

“Couldn't you buy some, then?” said Molly, smoothing her crumpled
morning-glories, with a sigh.

“Who ever heard of a fellow having any money left the last day of the
month?” demanded Gus, severely.

“Or girls either. I spent all mine in ribbon and paper for my baskets,
and now they are of no use. It's a shame!” lamented Jill, while Merry
began to thin out her full baskets to fill the empty ones.

“Hold on!” cried Frank, relenting. “Now, Jack, make their minds easy
before they begin to weep and wail.”

“Left the box outside. You tell while I go for it;” and Jack bolted, as
if afraid the young ladies might be too demonstrative when the tale was
told.

“Tell away,” said Frank, modestly passing the story along to Gus, who
made short work of it.

“We rampaged all over the country, and got only that small mess of
greens. Knew you'd be disgusted, and sat down to see what we could do.
Then Jack piped up, and said he'd show us a place where we could get
a plenty. 'Come on,' said we, and after leading us a nice tramp, he
brought us out at Morse's greenhouse. So we got a few on tick, as we had
but four cents among us, and there you are. Pretty clever of the little
chap, wasn't it?”

A chorus of delight greeted Jack as he popped his head in, was promptly
seized by his elders and walked up to the table, where the box was
opened, displaying gay posies enough to fill most of the baskets if
distributed with great economy and much green.

“You are the dearest boy that ever was!” began Jill, with her nose
luxuriously buried in the box, though the flowers were more remarkable
for color than perfume.

“No, I'm not; there's a much dearer one coming upstairs now, and he's
got something that will make you howl for joy,” said Jack, ignoring his
own prowess as Ed came in with a bigger box, looking as if he had done
nothing but go a Maying all his days.

“Don't believe it!” cried Jill, hugging her own treasure jealously.
“It's only another joke. I won't look,” said Molly, still struggling to
make her cambric roses bloom again.

“I know what it is! Oh, how sweet!” added Merry, sniffing, as Ed set the
box before her, saying pleasantly,--

“You shall see first, because you had faith.”

Up went the cover, and a whiff of the freshest fragrance regaled the
seven eager noses bent to inhale it, as a general murmur of pleasure
greeted the nest of great, rosy mayflowers that lay before them.

“The dear things, how lovely they are!” and Merry looked as if greeting
her cousins, so blooming and sweet was her own face.

Molly pushed her dingy garlands away, ashamed of such poor attempts
beside these perfect works of nature, and Jill stretched out her hand
involuntarily, as she said, forgetting her exotics, “Give me just one to
smell of, it is so woodsy and delicious.”

“Here you are, plenty for all. Real Pilgrim Fathers, right from
Plymouth. One of our fellows lives there, and I told him to bring me a
good lot; so he did, and you can do what you like with them,” explained
Ed, passing round bunches and shaking the rest in a mossy pile upon the
table.

“Ed always gets ahead of us in doing the right thing at the right time.
Hope you've got some first-class baskets ready for him,” said Gus,
refreshing the Washingtonian nose with a pink blossom or two.

“Not much danger of _his_ being forgotten,” answered Molly; and
every one laughed, for Ed was much beloved by all the girls, and his
door-steps always bloomed like a flower-bed on May eve.

“Now we must fly round and fill up. Come, boys, sort out the green and
hand us the flowers as we want them. Then we must direct them, and, by
the time that is done, you can go and leave them,” said Jill, setting
all to work.

“Ed must choose his baskets first. These are ours; but any of those you
can have;” and Molly pointed to a detachment of gay baskets, set apart
from those already partly filled.

Ed chose a blue one, and Merry filled it with the rosiest may-flowers,
knowing that it was to hang on Mabel's door-handle.

The others did the same, and the pretty work went on, with much fun,
till all were filled, and ready for the names or notes.

“Let us have poetry, as we can't get wild flowers. That will be rather
fine,” proposed Jill, who liked jingles.

All had had some practice at the game parties, and pencils went briskly
for a few minutes, while silence reigned, as the poets racked their
brains for rhymes, and stared at the blooming array before them for
inspiration.

“Oh, dear! I can't find a word to rhyme to 'geranium,'” sighed Molly,
pulling her braid, as if to pump the well of her fancy dry.

“Cranium,” said Frank, who was getting on bravely with “Annette” and
“violet.”

“That is elegant!” and Molly scribbled away in great glee, for her poems
were always funny ones.

“How do you spell _anemoly_--the wild flower, I mean?” asked Jill, who
was trying to compose a very appropriate piece for her best basket, and
found it easier to feel love and gratitude than to put them into verse.

“Anemone; do spell it properly, or you'll get laughed at,” answered Gus,
wildly struggling to make his lines express great ardor, without being
“too spoony,” as he expressed it.

“No, I shouldn't. This person never laughs at other persons' mistakes,
as some persons do,” replied Jill, with dignity.

Jack was desperately chewing his pencil, for he could not get on at
all; but Ed had evidently prepared his poem, for his paper was half full
already, and Merry was smiling as she wrote a friendly line or two for
Ralph's basket, as she feared he would be forgotten, and knew he loved
kindness even more than he did beauty.

“Now let's read them,” proposed Molly, who loved to laugh even at
herself.

The boys politely declined, and scrambled their notes into the chosen
baskets in great haste; but the girls were less bashful. Jill was
invited to begin, and gave her little piece, with the pink hyacinth
basket before her, to illustrate her poem.

  “TO MY LADY

  “There are no flowers in the fields,
  No green leaves on the tree,
  No columbines, no violets,
  No sweet anemone.
  So I have gathered from my pots
  All that I have to fill
  The basket that I hang to-night,
  With heaps of love from Jill.”

“That's perfectly sweet! Mine isn't; but I meant it to be funny,” said
Molly, as if there could be any doubt about the following ditty:--

  “Dear Grif,
  Here is a whiff
  Of beautiful spring flowers;
  The big red rose
  Is for your nose,
  As toward the sky it towers.

  “Oh, do not frown
  Upon this crown
  Of green pinks and blue geranium
  But think of me
  When this you see,
  And put it on your cranium.”

“O Molly, you will never hear the last of that if Grif gets it,” said
Jill, as the applause subsided, for the boys pronounced it “tip-top.”

“Don't care, he gets the worst of it any way, for there is a pin in that
rose, and if he goes to smell the mayflowers underneath he will find a
thorn to pay for the tack he put in my rubber boot. I know he will play
me some joke to-night, and I mean to be first if I can,” answered Molly,
settling the artificial wreath round the orange-colored canoe which held
her effusion.

“Now, Merry, read yours: you always have sweet poems;” and Jill folded
her hands to listen with pleasure to something sentimental.

“I can't read the poems in some of mine, because they are for you; but
this little verse you can hear, if you like: I'm going to give that
basket to Ralph. He said he should hang one for his grandmother, and I
thought that was so nice of him, I'd love to surprise him with one all
to himself. He's always so good to us;” and Merry looked so innocently
earnest that no one smiled at her kind thought or the unconscious
paraphrase she had made of a famous stanza in her own “little verse.”

  “To one who teaches me
  The sweetness and the beauty
  Of doing faithfully
  And cheerfully my duty.”

“He will like that, and know who sent it, for none of us have pretty
pink paper but you, or write such an elegant hand,” said Molly, admiring
the delicate white basket shaped like a lily, with the flowers inside
and the note hidden among them, all daintily tied up with the palest
blush-colored ribbon.

“Well, that's no harm. He likes pretty things as much as I do, and I
made my basket like a flower because I gave him one of my callas, he
admired the shape so much;” and Merry smiled as she remembered how
pleased Ralph looked as he went away carrying the lovely thing.

“I think it would be a good plan to hang some baskets on the doors of
other people who don't expect or often have any. I'll do it if you can
spare some of these, we have so many. Give me only one, and let the
others go to old Mrs. Tucker, and the little Irish girl who has been
sick so long, and lame Neddy, and Daddy Munson. It would please and
surprise them so. Will we?” asked Ed, in that persuasive voice of his.

All agreed at once, and several people were made very happy by a bit of
spring left at their doors by the May elves who haunted the town that
night playing all sorts of pranks. Such a twanging of bells and
rapping of knockers; such a scampering of feet in the dark; such droll
collisions as boys came racing round corners, or girls ran into
one another's arms as they crept up and down steps on the sly; such
laughing, whistling, flying about of flowers and friendly feeling--it
was almost a pity that May-day did not come oftener.

Molly got home late, and found that Grif had been before her, after all;
for she stumbled over a market-basket at her door, and on taking it
in found a mammoth nosegay of purple and white cabbages, her favorite
vegetable. Even Miss Bat laughed at the funny sight, and Molly resolved
to get Ralph to carve her a bouquet out of carrots, beets, and turnips
for next time, as Grif would never think of that.

Merry ran up the garden-walk alone, for Frank left her at the gate,
and was fumbling for the latch when she felt something hanging there.
Opening the door carefully, she found it gay with offerings from her
mates; and among them was one long quiver-shaped basket of birch bark,
with something heavy under the green leaves that lay at the top. Lifting
these, a slender bas-relief of a calla lily in plaster appeared, with
this couplet slipped into the blue cord by which it was to hang:--

  “That mercy you to others show
  That Mercy Grant to me.”

“How lovely! and this one will never fade, but always be a pleasure
hanging there. Now, I really have something beautiful all my own,” said
Merry to herself as she ran up to hang the pretty thing on the dark
wainscot of her room, where the graceful curve of its pointed leaves and
the depth of its white cup would be a joy to her eyes as long as they
lasted.

“I wonder what that means,” and Merry read over the lines again, while
a soft color came into her cheeks and a little smile of girlish pleasure
began to dimple round her lips; for she was so romantic, this touch
of sentiment showed her that her friendship was more valued than she
dreamed. But she only said, “How glad I am I remembered him, and how
surprised he will be to see mayflowers in return for the lily.”

He was, and worked away more happily and bravely for the thought of
the little friend whose eyes would daily fall on the white flower which
always reminded him of her.




Chapter XIX. Good Templars


“Hi there! Bell's rung! Get up, lazy-bones!” called Frank from his room
as the clock struck six one bright morning, and a great creaking and
stamping proclaimed that he was astir.

“All right, I'm coming,” responded a drowsy voice, and Jack turned over
as if to obey; but there the effort ended, and he was off again, for
growing lads are hard to rouse, as many a mother knows to her sorrow.

Frank made a beginning on his own toilet, and then took a look at his
brother, for the stillness was suspicious.

“I thought so! He told me to wake him, and I guess this will do it;”
 and, filling his great sponge with water, Frank stalked into the next
room and stood over the unconscious victim like a stern executioner,
glad to unite business with pleasure in this agreeable manner.

A woman would have relented and tried some milder means, for when his
broad shoulders and stout limbs were hidden, Jack looked very young and
innocent in his sleep. Even Frank paused a moment to look at the round,
rosy face, the curly eyelashes, half-open mouth, and the peaceful
expression of a dreaming baby. “I _must_ do it, or he won't be ready for
breakfast,” said the Spartan brother, and down came the sponge, cold,
wet, and choky, as it was briskly rubbed to and fro regardless of every
obstacle.

“Come, I say! That's not fair! Leave me alone!” sputtered Jack, hitting
out so vigorously that the sponge flew across the room, and Frank fell
back to laugh at the indignant sufferer.

“I promised to wake you, and you believe in keeping promises, so I'm
doing my best to get you up.”

“Well, you needn't pour a quart of water down a fellow's neck, and
rub his nose off, need you? I'm awake, so take your old sponge and go
along,” growled Jack, with one eye open and a mighty gape.

“See that you keep so, then, or I'll come and give you another sort of a
rouser,” said Frank, retiring well-pleased with his success.

“I shall have one good stretch, if I like. It is strengthening to the
muscles, and I'm as stiff as a board with all that football yesterday,”
 murmured Jack, lying down for one delicious moment. He shut the open eye
to enjoy it thoroughly, and forgot the stretch altogether, for the bed
was warm, the pillow soft, and a half-finished dream still hung about
his drowsy brain. Who does not know the fatal charm of that stolen
moment--for once yield to it, and one is lost.

Jack was miles away “in the twinkling of a bedpost,” and the pleasing
dream seemed about to return, when a ruthless hand tore off the clothes,
swept him out of bed, and he really did awake to find himself standing
in the middle of his bath-pan with both windows open, and Frank about to
pour a pail of water over him.

“Hold on! Yah, how cold the water is! Why, I thought I _was_ up;” and,
hopping out, Jack rubbed his eyes and looked about with such a genuine
surprise that Frank put down the pail, feeling that the deluge would not
be needed this time.

“You are now, and I'll see that you keep so,” he said, as he stripped
the bed and carried off the pillows.

“I don't care. What a jolly day!” and Jack took a little promenade to
finish the rousing process.

“You'd better hurry up, or you won't get your chores done before
breakfast. No time for a 'go as you please' now,” said Frank; and both
boys laughed, for it was an old joke of theirs, and rather funny.

Going up to bed one night expecting to find Jack asleep, Frank
discovered him tramping round and round the room airily attired in
a towel, and so dizzy with his brisk revolutions that as his brother
looked he tumbled over and lay panting like a fallen gladiator.

“What on earth are you about?”

“Playing Rowell. Walking for the belt, and I've got it too,” laughed
Jack, pointing to an old gilt chandelier chain hanging on the bedpost.

“You little noodle, you'd better revolve into bed before you lose your
head entirely. I never saw such a fellow for taking himself off his
legs.”

“Well, if I didn't exercise, do you suppose I should be able to do
that--or that?” cried Jack, turning a somersault and striking a fine
attitude as he came up, flattering himself that he was the model of a
youthful athlete.

“You look more like a clothes-pin than a Hercules,” was the crushing
reply of this unsympathetic brother, and Jack meekly retired with a bad
headache.

“I don't do such silly things now: I'm as broad across the shoulders as
you are, and twice as strong on my pins, thanks to my gymnastics. Bet
you a cent I'll be dressed first, though you have got the start,”
 said Jack, knowing that Frank always had a protracted wrestle with his
collar-buttons, which gave his adversary a great advantage over him.

“Done!” answered Frank, and at it they went. A wild scramble was heard
in Jack's room, and a steady tramp in the other as Frank worked away at
the stiff collar and the unaccommodating button till every finger ached.
A clashing of boots followed, while Jack whistled “Polly Hopkins,” and
Frank declaimed in his deepest voice,

“Arma virumque cano, Trojae qui primus ab oris Italiam, fato profugus,
Laviniaque venit litora.”

Hair-brushes came next, and here Frank got ahead, for Jack's thick crop
would stand straight up on the crown, and only a good wetting and a
steady brush would make it lie down.

“Play away, No. 2,” called out Frank as he put on his vest, while Jack
was still at it with a pair of the stiffest brushes procurable for
money.

“Hold hard, No. 11, and don't forget your teeth,” answered Jack, who had
done his.

Frank took a hasty rub and whisked on his coat, while Jack was picking
up the various treasures which had flown out of his pockets as he caught
up his roundabout.

“Ready! I'll trouble you for a cent, sonny;” and Frank held out his hand
as he appeared equipped for the day.

“You haven't hung up your night-gown, nor aired the bed, nor opened
the windows. That's part of the dressing; mother said so. I've got you
there, for you did all that for me, except this,” and Jack threw his
gown over a chair with a triumphant flourish as Frank turned back to
leave his room in the order which they had been taught was one of the
signs of a good bringing-up in boys as well as girls.

“Ready! I'll trouble _you_ for a cent, old man;” and Jack held out his
hand, with a chuckle.

He got the money and a good clap beside; then they retired to the shed
to black their boots, after which Frank filled the woodboxes and Jack
split kindlings, till the daily allowance was ready. Both went at their
lessons for half an hour, Jack scowling over his algebra in the sofa
corner, while Frank, with his elbows on and his legs round the little
stand which held his books, seemed to be having a wrestling-match with
Herodotus.

When the bell rang they were glad to drop the lessons and fall upon
their breakfast with the appetite of wolves, especially Jack, who
sequestered oatmeal and milk with such rapidity that one would have
thought he had a leathern bag hidden somewhere to slip it into, like his
famous namesake when he breakfasted with the giant.

“I declare I don't see what he does with it! He really ought not to
'gobble' so, mother,” said Frank, who was eating with great deliberation
and propriety.

“Never you mind, old quiddle. I'm so hungry I could tuck away a bushel,”
 answered Jack, emptying a glass of milk and holding out his plate for
more mush, regardless of his white moustache.

“Temperance in all things is wise, in speech as well as eating and
drinking--remember that, boys,” said Mamma from behind the urn.

“That reminds me! We promised to do the 'Observer' this week, and here
it is Tuesday and I haven't done a thing: have you?” asked Frank.

“Never thought of it. We must look up some bits at noon instead of
playing. Dare say Jill has got some: she always saves all she finds for
me.”

“I have one or two good items, and can do any copying there may be. But
I think if you undertake the paper you should give some time and labor
to make it good,” said Mamma, who was used to this state of affairs,
and often edited the little sheet read every week at the Lodge. The boys
seldom missed going, but the busy lady was often unable to be there, so
helped with the paper as her share of the labor.

“Yes, we ought, but somehow we don't seem to get up much steam about it
lately. If more people belonged, and we could have a grand time now and
then, it would be jolly;” and Jack sighed at the lack of interest felt
by outsiders in the loyal little Lodge which went on year after year
kept up by the faithful few.

“I remember when in this very town we used to have a Cold Water Army,
and in the summer turn out with processions, banners, and bands of music
to march about, and end with a picnic, songs, and speeches in some grove
or hall. Nearly all the children belonged to it, and the parents also,
and we had fine times here twenty-five or thirty years ago.”

“It didn't do much good, seems to me, for people still drink, and we
haven't a decent hotel in the place,” said Frank, as his mother sat
looking out of the window as if she saw again the pleasant sight of old
and young working together against the great enemy of home peace and
safety.

“Oh yes, it did, my dear; for to this day many of those children are
true to their pledge. One little girl was, I am sure, and now has two
big boys to fight for the reform she has upheld all her life. The
town is better than it was in those days, and if we each do our part
faithfully, it will improve yet more. Every boy and girl who joins is
one gained, perhaps, and your example is the best temperance lecture you
can give. Hold fast, and don't mind if it isn't 'jolly': it is _right_,
and that should be enough for us.”

Mamma spoke warmly, for she heartily believed in young people's guarding
against this dangerous vice before it became a temptation, and hoped
her boys would never break the pledge they had taken; for, young as they
were, they were old enough to see its worth, feel its wisdom, and pride
themselves on the promise which was fast growing into a principle.
Jack's face brightened as he listened, and Frank said, with the steady
look which made his face manly,--

“It shall be. Now I'll tell you what I was going to keep as a surprise
till to-night, for I wanted to have my secret as well as other folks.
Ed and I went up to see Bob, Sunday, and he said he'd join the Lodge, if
they'd have him. I'm going to propose him to-night.”

“Good! good!” cried Jack, joyfully, and Mrs. Minot clapped her hands,
for every new member was rejoiced over by the good people, who were not
discouraged by ridicule, indifference, or opposition.

“We've got him now, for no one will object, and it is just the thing for
him. He wants to belong somewhere, he says, and he'll enjoy the fun, and
the good things will help him, and we will look after him. The Captain
was so pleased, and you ought to have seen Ed's face when Bob said, 'I'm
ready, if you'll have me.'”

Frank's own face was beaming, and Jack forgot to “gobble,” he was so
interested in the new convert, while Mamma said, as she threw down her
napkin and took up the newspaper,--

“We must not forget our 'Observer,' but have a good one tonight in honor
of the occasion. There may be something here. Come home early at noon,
and I'll help you get your paper ready.”

“I'll be here, but if you want Frank, you'd better tell him not to
dawdle over Annette's gate half an hour,” began Jack, who could not
resist teasing his dignified brother about one of the few foolish things
he was fond of doing.

“Do you want your nose pulled?” demanded Frank, who never would stand
joking on that tender point from his brother.

“No, I don't; and if I did, you couldn't do it;” with which taunt he was
off and Frank after him, having made a futile dive at the impertinent
little nose which was turned up at him and his sweetheart.

“Boys, boys, not through the parlor!” implored Mamma, resigned to
skirmishes, but trembling for her piano legs as the four stout boots
pranced about the table and then went thundering down the hall, through
the kitchen where the fat cook cheered them on, and Mary, the maid,
tried to head off Frank as Jack rushed out into the garden. But the
pursuer ducked under her arm and gave chase with all speed. Then there
was a glorious race all over the place; for both were good runners, and,
being as full of spring vigor as frisky calves, they did astonishing
things in the way of leaping fences, dodging round corners, and making
good time down the wide walks.

But Jack's leg was not quite strong yet, and he felt that his round nose
was in danger of a vengeful tweak as his breath began to give out and
Frank's long arms drew nearer and nearer to the threatened feature. Just
when he was about to give up and meet his fate like a man, old Bunny,
who had been much excited by the race, came scampering across the path
with such a droll skip into the air and shake of the hind legs that
Frank had to dodge to avoid stepping on him, and to laugh in spite of
himself. This momentary check gave Jack a chance to bolt up the back
stairs and take refuge in the Bird Room, from the window of which Jill
had been watching the race with great interest.

No romping was allowed there, so a truce was made by locking little
fingers, and both sat down to get their breath.

“I am to go on the piazza, for an hour, by and by, Doctor said. Would
you mind carrying me down before you go to school, you do it so nicely,
I'm not a bit afraid,” said Jill, as eager for the little change as if
it had been a long and varied journey.

“Yes, indeed! Come on, Princess,” answered Jack, glad to see her so well
and happy.

The boys made an arm-chair, and away she went, for a pleasant day
downstairs. She thanked Frank with a posy for his buttonhole, well
knowing that it would soon pass into other hands, and he departed to
join Annette. Having told Jill about Bob, and set her to work on the
“Observer,” Jack kissed his mother, and went whistling down the street,
a gay little bachelor, with a nod and smile for all he met, and no
turned-up hat or jaunty turban bobbing along beside him to delay his
steps or trouble his peace of mind.

At noon they worked on their paper, which was a collection of items,
cut from other papers, concerning temperance, a few anecdotes, a bit of
poetry, a story, and, if possible, an original article by the editor.
Many hands make light work, and nothing remained but a little copying,
which Jill promised to do before night. So the boys had time for a game
of football after school in the afternoon, which they much enjoyed. As
they sat resting on the posts, Gus said,--

“Uncle Fred says he will give us a hay-cart ride to-night, as it is
moony, and after it you are all to come to our house and have games.

“Can't do it,” answered Frank, sadly.

“Lodge,” groaned Jack, for both considered a drive in the cart, where
they all sat in a merry bunch among the hay, one of the joys of life,
and much regretted that a prior engagement would prevent their sharing
in it.

“That's a pity! I forgot it was Tuesday, and can't put it off, as I've
asked all the rest. Give up your old Lodge and come along,” said Gus,
who had not joined yet.

“We might for once, perhaps, but I don't like to”--began Jack,
hesitating.

“_I_ won't. Who's to propose Bob if we don't? I want to go awfully; but
I wouldn't disappoint Bob for a good deal, now he is willing to come.”
 And Frank sprang off his post as if anxious to flee temptation, for it
_was_ very pleasant to go singing, up hill and down dale, in the spring
moonlight, with--well, the fellows of his set.

“Nor Ed, I forgot that. No, we can't go. We want to be Good Templars,
and we mustn't shirk,” added Jack, following his brother.

“Better come. Can't put it off. Lots of fun,” called Gus, disappointed
at losing two of his favorite mates.

But the boys did not turn back, and as they went steadily away they felt
that they _were_ doing their little part in the good work, and making
their small sacrifices, like faithful members.

They got their reward, however, for at home they found Mr. Chauncey, a
good and great man, from England, who had known their grandfather, and
was an honored friend of the family. The boys loved to hear him talk,
and all tea-time listened with interest to the conversation, for Mr.
Chauncey was a reformer as well as a famous clergyman, and it was like
inspiring music to hear him tell about the world's work, and the brave
men and women who were carrying it on. Eager to show that they had, at
least, begun, the boys told him about their Lodge, and were immensely
pleased when their guest took from his pocket-book a worn paper, proving
that he too was a Good Templar, and belonged to the same army as they
did. Nor was that all, for when they reluctantly excused themselves,
Mr. Chauncey gave each a hearty “grip,” and said, holding their hands in
his, as he smiled at the young faces looking up at him with so much love
and honor in them,--

“Tell the brothers and sisters that if I can serve them in any way while
here, to command me. I will give them a lecture at their Lodge or in
public, whichever they like; and I wish you God-speed, dear boys.”

Two prouder lads never walked the streets than Frank and Jack as they
hurried away, nearly forgetting the poor little paper in their haste to
tell the good news; for it was seldom that such an offer was made the
Lodge, and they felt the honor done them as bearers of it.

As the secrets of the association cannot be divulged to the uninitiated,
we can only say that there was great rejoicing over the new member, for
Bob was unanimously welcomed, and much gratitude both felt and expressed
for Mr. Chauncey's interest in this small division of the grand army;
for these good folk met with little sympathy from the great people of
the town, and it was very cheering to have a well-known and much-beloved
man say a word for them. All agreed that the lecture should be public,
that others might share the pleasure with them, and perhaps be converted
by a higher eloquence than any they possessed.

So the services that night were unusually full of spirit and good cheer;
for all felt the influence of a friendly word, the beauty of a fine
example. The paper was much applauded, the songs were very hearty, and
when Frank, whose turn it was to be chaplain, read the closing prayer,
every one felt that they had much to give thanks for, since one more had
joined them, and the work was slowly getting on with unexpected helpers
sent to lend a hand. The lights shone out from the little hall across
the street, the music reached the ears of passers-by, and the busy hum
of voices up there told how faithfully some, at least, of the villagers
tried to make the town a safer place for their boys to grow up in,
though the tavern still had its private bar and the saloon-door stood
open to invite them in.

There are many such quiet lodges, and in them many young people learning
as these lads were learning something of the duty they owed their
neighbors as well as themselves, and being fitted to become good men
and sober citizens by practising and preaching the law and gospel of
temperance.

The next night Mr. Chauncey lectured, and the town turned out to hear
the distinguished man, who not only told them of the crime and misery
produced by this terrible vice which afflicted both England and America,
but of the great crusade against it going on everywhere, and the need of
courage, patience, hard work, and much faith, that in time it might
be overcome. Strong and cheerful words that all liked to hear and many
heartily believed, especially the young Templars, whose boyish fancies
were won by the idea of fighting as knights of old did in the famous
crusades they read about in their splendid new young folks' edition of
Froissart.

“We can't pitch into people as the Red Cross fellows did, but we can
smash rum-jugs when we get the chance, and stand by our flag as our men
did in the war,” said Frank, with sparkling eyes, as they went home in
the moonlight arm in arm, keeping step behind Mr. Chauncey, who led the
way with their mother on his arm, a martial figure though a minister,
and a good captain to follow, as the boys felt after hearing his
stirring words.

“Let's try and get up a company of boys like those mother told us about,
and show people that we mean what we say. I'll be color-bearer, and you
may drill us as much as you like. A real Cold Water Army, with flags
flying, and drums, and all sorts of larks,” said Jack, much excited, and
taking a dramatic view of the matter.

“We'll see about it. Something ought to be done, and perhaps we shall be
the men to do it when the time comes,” answered Frank, feeling ready to
shoulder a musket or be a minute-man in good earnest.

Boyish talk and enthusiasm, but it was of the right sort; and when time
and training had fitted them to bear arms, these young knights would be
worthy to put on the red cross and ride away to help right the wrongs
and slay the dragons that afflict the world.




Chapter XX. A Sweet Memory


Now the lovely June days had come, everything began to look really
summer-like; school would soon be over, and the young people were
joyfully preparing for the long vacation.

“We are all going up to Bethlehem. We take the seashore one year and the
mountains the next. Better come along,” said Gus, as the boys lay on
the grass after beating the Lincolns at one of the first matches of the
season.

“Can't; we are off to Pebbly Beach the second week in July. Our invalids
need sea air. That one looks delicate, doesn't he?” asked Frank, giving
Jack a slight rap with his bat as that young gentleman lay in his usual
attitude admiring the blue hose and russet shoes which adorned his
sturdy limbs.

“Stop that, Captain! You needn't talk about invalids, when you know
mother says you are not to look at a book for a month because you
have studied yourself thin and headachy. I'm all right;” and Jack gave
himself a sounding slap on the chest, where shone the white star of the
H.B.B.C.

“Hear the little cockerel crow! you just wait till you get into the
college class, and see if you don't have to study like fun,” said Gus,
with unruffled composure, for he was going to Harvard next year, and
felt himself already a Senior.

“Never shall; I don't want any of your old colleges. I'm going into
business as soon as I can. Ed says I may be his book-keeper, if I am
ready when he starts for himself. That is much jollier than grinding
away for four years, and then having to grind ever so many more at a
profession,” said Jack, examining with interest the various knocks and
bruises with which much ball-playing had adorned his hands.

“Much you know about it. Just as well you don't mean to try, for it
would take a mighty long pull and strong pull to get you in. Business
would suit you better, and you and Ed would make a capital partnership.
Devlin, Minot, & Co. sounds well, hey, Gus?”

“Very, but they are such good-natured chaps, they'd never get rich.
By the way, Ed came home at noon to-day sick. I met him, and he looked
regularly knocked up,” answered Gus, in a sober tone.

“I told him he'd better not go down Monday, for he wasn't well Saturday,
and couldn't come to sing Sunday evening, you remember. I must go right
round and see what the matter is;” and Jack jumped up, with an anxious
face.

“Let him alone till to-morrow. He won't want any one fussing over him
now. We are going for a pull; come along and steer,” said Frank, for
the sunset promised to be fine, and the boys liked a brisk row in their
newly painted boat, the “Rhodora.”

“Go ahead and get ready, I'll just cut round and ask at the door. It
will seem kind, and I must know how Ed is. Won't be long;” and Jack was
off at his best pace.

The others were waiting impatiently when he came back with slower steps
and a more anxious face.

“How is the old fellow?” called Frank from the boat, while Gus stood
leaning on an oar in a nautical attitude.

“Pretty sick. Had the doctor. May have a fever. I didn't go in, but Ed
sent his love, and wanted to know who beat,” answered Jack, stepping to
his place, glad to rest and cool himself.

“Guess he'll be all right in a day or two;” and Gus pushed off, leaving
all care behind.

“Hope he won't have typhoid--that's no joke, I tell you,” said Frank,
who knew all about it, and did not care to repeat the experience.

“He's worked too hard. He's so faithful he does more than his share, and
gets tired out. Mother asked him to come down and see us when he has his
vacation; we are going to have high old times fishing and boating. Up or
down?” asked Jack, as they glided out into the river.

Gus looked both ways, and seeing another boat with a glimpse of red in
it just going round the bend, answered, with decision, “Up, of course.
Don't we always pull to the bridge?”

“Not when the girls are going down,” laughed Jack, who had recognized
Juliet's scarlet boating-suit as he glanced over his shoulder.

“Mind what you are about, and don't gabble,” commanded Captain Frank, as
the crew bent to their oars and the slender boat cut through the water
leaving a long furrow trembling behind.

“Oh, ah! I see! There is a blue jacket as well as a red one, so it's all
right.

  “Lady Queen Anne, she sits in the sun,
  As white as a lily, as brown as a bun,”

sung Jack, recovering his spirits, and wishing Jill was there too.

“Do you want a ducking?” sternly demanded Gus, anxious to preserve
discipline.

“Shouldn't mind, its so warm.”

But Jack said no more, and soon the “Rhodora” was alongside the “Water
Witch,” exchanging greetings in the most amiable manner.

“Pity this boat won't hold four. We'd put Jack in yours, and take you
girls a nice spin up to the Hemlocks,” said Frank, whose idea of bliss
was floating down the river with Annette as coxswain.

“You'd better come in here, this will hold four, and we are tired of
rowing,” returned the “Water Witch,” so invitingly that Gus could not
resist.

“I don't think it is safe to put four in there. You'd better change
places with Annette, Gus, and then we shall be ship-shape,” said Frank,
answering a telegram from the eyes that matched the blue jacket.

“Wouldn't it be _more_ ship-shape still if you put me ashore at Grif's
landing? I can take his boat, or wait till you come back. Don't care
what I do,” said Jack, feeling himself sadly in the way.

The good-natured offer being accepted with thanks, the changes were
made, and, leaving him behind, the two boats went gayly up the river. He
really did not care what he did, so sat in Grif's boat awhile watching
the red sky, the shining stream, and the low green meadows, where the
blackbirds were singing as if they too had met their little sweethearts
and were happy.

Jack remembered that quiet half-hour long afterward, because what
followed seemed to impress it on his memory. As he sat enjoying the
scene, he very naturally thought about Ed; for the face of the sister
whom he saw was very anxious, and the word “fever” recalled the hard
times when Frank was ill, particularly the night it was thought the boy
would not live till dawn, and Jack cried himself to sleep, wondering how
he ever could get on without his brother. Ed was almost as dear to him,
and the thought that he was suffering destroyed Jack's pleasure for
a little while. But, fortunately, young people do not know how to be
anxious very long, so our boy soon cheered up, thinking about the late
match between the Stars and the Lincolns, and after a good rest went
whistling home, with a handful of mint for Mrs. Pecq, and played games
with Jill as merrily as if there was no such thing as care in the world.

Next day Ed was worse, and for a week the answer was the same, when Jack
crept to the back door with his eager question.

Others came also, for the dear boy lying upstairs had friends
everywhere, and older neighbors thought of him even more anxiously and
tenderly than his mates. It was not fever, but some swifter trouble, for
when Saturday night came, Ed had gone home to a longer and more peaceful
Sabbath than any he had ever known in this world.

Jack had been there in the afternoon, and a kind message had come down
to him that his friend was not suffering so much, and he had gone away,
hoping, in his boyish ignorance, that all danger was over. An hour later
he was reading in the parlor, having no heart for play, when Frank came
in with a look upon his face which would have prepared Jack for the news
if he had seen it. But he did not look up, and Frank found it so hard to
speak, that he lingered a moment at the piano, as he often did when
he came home. It stood open, and on the rack was the “Jolly Brothers'
Galop,” which he had been learning to play with Ed. Big boy as he was,
the sudden thought that never again would they sit shoulder to shoulder,
thundering the marches or singing the songs both liked so well, made his
eyes fill as he laid away the music, and shut the instrument, feeling as
if he never wanted to touch it again. Then he went and sat down beside
Jack with an arm round his neck, trying to steady his voice by a natural
question before he told the heavy news.

“What are you reading, Jacky?”

The unusual caress, the very gentle tone, made Jack look up, and the
minute he saw Frank's face he knew the truth.

“Is Ed----?” he could not say the hard word, and Frank could only answer
by a nod as he winked fast, for the tears would come. Jack said no more,
but as the book dropped from his knee he hid his face in the sofa-pillow
and lay quite still, not crying, but trying to make it seem true that
his dear Ed had gone away for ever. He could not do it, and presently
turned his head a little to say, in a despairing tone,--

“I don't see what I _shall_ do without him!”

“I know it's hard for you. It is for all of us.”

“You've got Gus, but now I haven't anybody. Ed was always so good to
me!” and with the name so many tender recollections came, that poor Jack
broke down in spite of his manful attempts to smother the sobs in the
red pillow.

There was an unconscious reproach in the words, Frank thought; for
he was not as gentle as Ed, and he did not wonder that Jack loved and
mourned for the lost friend like a brother.

“You've got me. I'll be good to you; cry if you want to, I don't mind.”

There was such a sympathetic choke in Frank's voice that Jack felt
comforted at once, and when he had had his cry out, which was very soon,
he let Frank pull him up with a bear-like but affectionate hug, and sat
leaning on him as they talked about their loss, both feeling that there
might have been a greater one, and resolving to love one another very
much hereafter.

Mrs. Minot often called Frank the “father-boy,” because he was now the
head of the house, and a sober, reliable fellow for his years. Usually
he did not show much affection except to her, for, as he once said, “I
shall never be too old to kiss my mother,” and she often wished that he
had a little sister, to bring out the softer side of his character. He
domineered over Jack and laughed at his affectionate little ways, but
now when trouble came, he was as kind and patient as a girl; and
when Mamma came in, having heard the news, she found her “father-boy”
 comforting his brother so well that she slipped away without a word,
leaving them to learn one of the sweet lessons sorrow teaches--to lean
on one another, and let each trial bring them closer together.

It is often said that there should be no death or grief in children's
stories. It is not wise to dwell on the dark and sad side of these
things; but they have also a bright and lovely side, and since even the
youngest, dearest, and most guarded child cannot escape some knowledge
of the great mystery, is it not well to teach them in simple, cheerful
ways that affection sweetens sorrow, and a lovely life can make death
beautiful? I think so, therefore try to tell the last scene in the
history of a boy who really lived and really left behind him a memory so
precious that it will not be soon forgotten by those who knew and loved
him. For the influence of this short life was felt by many, and even
this brief record of it may do for other children what the reality did
for those who still lay flowers on his grave, and try to be “as good as
Eddy.”

Few would have thought that the death of a quiet lad of seventeen
would have been so widely felt, so sincerely mourned; but virtue, like
sunshine, works its own sweet miracles, and when it was known that never
again would the bright face be seen in the village streets, the cheery
voice heard, the loving heart felt in any of the little acts which so
endeared Ed Devlin to those about him, it seemed as if young and old
grieved alike for so much promise cut off in its spring-time. This was
proved at the funeral, for, though it took place at the busy hour of a
busy day, men left their affairs, women their households, young people
their studies and their play, and gave an hour to show their affection,
respect, and sympathy for those who had lost so much.

The girls had trimmed the church with all the sweetest flowers they
could find, and garlands of lilies of the valley robbed the casket of
its mournful look. The boys had brought fresh boughs to make the grave
a green bed for their comrade's last sleep. Now they were all gathered
together, and it was a touching sight to see the rows of young faces
sobered and saddened by their first look at sorrow. The girls sobbed,
and the boys set their lips tightly as their glances fell upon the
lilies under which the familiar face lay full of solemn peace. Tears
dimmed older eyes when the hymn the dead boy loved was sung, and the
pastor told with how much pride and pleasure he had watched the gracious
growth of this young parishioner since he first met the lad of twelve
and was attracted by the shining face, the pleasant manners. Dutiful
and loving; ready to help; patient to bear and forbear; eager to excel;
faithful to the smallest task, yet full of high ambitions; and, better
still, possessing the childlike piety that can trust and believe, wait
and hope. Good and happy--the two things we all long for and so few of
us truly are. This he was, and this single fact was the best eulogy his
pastor could pronounce over the beloved youth gone to a nobler manhood
whose promise left so sweet a memory behind.

As the young people looked, listened, and took in the scene, they felt
as if some mysterious power had changed their playmate from a creature
like themselves into a sort of saint or hero for them to look up to, and
imitate if they could. “What has he done, to be so loved, praised, and
mourned?” they thought, with a tender sort of wonder; and the answer
seemed to come to them as never before, for never had they been brought
so near the solemn truth of life and death. “It was not what he did but
what he was that made him so beloved. All that was sweet and noble in
him still lives; for goodness is the only thing we can take with us when
we die, the only thing that can comfort those we leave behind, and help
us to meet again hereafter.”

This feeling was in many hearts when they went away to lay him, with
prayer and music, under the budding oak that leaned over his grave,
a fit emblem of the young life just beginning its new spring. As the
children did their part, the beauty of the summer day soothed their
sorrow, and something of the soft brightness of the June sunshine seemed
to gild their thoughts, as it gilded the flower-strewn mound they left
behind. The true and touching words spoken cheered as well as impressed
them, and made them feel that their friend was not lost but gone on
into a higher class of the great school whose Master is eternal love
and wisdom. So the tears soon dried, and the young faces looked up like
flowers after rain. But the heaven-sent shower sank into the earth, and
they were the stronger, sweeter for it, more eager to make life brave
and beautiful, because death had gently shown them what it should be.

When the boys came home they found their mother already returned, and
Jill upon the parlor sofa listening to her account of the funeral with
the same quiet, hopeful look which their own faces wore; for somehow the
sadness seemed to have gone, and a sort of Sunday peace remained.

“I'm glad it was all so sweet and pleasant. Come and rest, you look
so tired;” and Jill held out her hands to greet them--a crumpled
handkerchief in one and a little bunch of fading lilies in the other.

Jack sat down in the low chair beside her and leaned his head against
the arm of the sofa, for he was tired. But Frank walked slowly up and
down the long rooms with a serious yet serene look on his face, for he
felt as if he had learned something that day, and would always be the
better for it. Presently he said, stopping before his mother, who leaned
in the easy-chair looking up at the picture of her boys' father,--

“I should like to have just such things said about me when I die.”

“So should I, if I deserved them as Ed did!” cried Jack, earnestly.

“You may if you try. I should be proud to hear them, and if they were
true, they would comfort me more than anything else. I am glad you see
the lovely side of sorrow, and are learning the lesson such losses teach
us,” answered their mother, who believed in teaching young people to
face trouble bravely, and find the silver lining in the clouds that come
to all of us.

“I never thought much about it before, but now dying doesn't seem
dreadful at all--only solemn and beautiful. Somehow everybody seems to
love everybody else more for it, and try to be kind and good and pious.
I can't say what I mean, but you know, mother;” and Frank went pacing
on again with the bright look his eyes always wore when he listened to
music or read of some noble action.

“That's what Merry said when she and Molly came in on their way home.
But Molly felt dreadfully, and so did Mabel. She brought me these
flowers to press, for we are all going to keep some to remember dear Ed
by,” said Jill, carefully smoothing out the little bells as she laid the
lilies in her hymn-book, for she too had had a thoughtful hour while she
lay alone, imagining all that went on in the church, and shedding a few
tender tears over the friend who was always so kind to her.

“I don't want anything to remember him by. I was so fond of him, I
couldn't forget if I tried. I know I ought not to say it, but I _don't_
see why God let him die,” said Jack, with a quiver in his voice, for his
loving heart could not help aching still.

“No, dear, we cannot see or know many things that grieve us very much,
but we _can_ trust that it is right, and try to believe that all is
meant for our good. That is what faith means, and without it we are
miserable. When you were little, you were afraid of the dark, but if I
spoke or touched you, then you were sure all was well, and fell asleep
holding my hand. God is wiser and stronger than any father or mother,
so hold fast to Him, and you will have no doubt or fear, however dark it
seems.”

“As you do,” said Jack, going to sit on the arm of Mamma's chair, with
his cheek to hers, willing to trust as she bade him, but glad to hold
fast the living hand that had led and comforted him all his life.

“Ed used to say to me when I fretted about getting well, and thought
nobody cared for me, which was very naughty, 'Don't be troubled, God
won't forget you; and if you must be lame, He will make you able to
bear it,'” said Jill, softly, her quick little mind all alive with new
thoughts and feelings.

“He believed it, and that's why he liked that hymn so much. I'm glad
they sung it to-day,” said Frank, bringing his heavy dictionary to lay
on the book where the flowers were pressing.

“Oh, thank you! Could you play that tune for me? I didn't hear it, and
I'd love to, if you are willing,” asked Jill.

“I didn't think I ever should want to play again, but I do. Will you
sing it for her, mother? I'm afraid I shall break down if I try alone.”

“We will all sing, music is good for us now,” said Mamma; and in rather
broken voices they did sing Ed's favorite words:--

  “Not a sparrow falleth but its God doth know,
  Just as when his mandate lays a monarch low;
  Not a leaflet moveth, but its God doth see,
  Think not, then, O mortal, God forgetteth thee.
  Far more precious surely than the birds that fly
  Is a Father's image to a Father's eye.
  E'en thy hairs are numbered; trust Him full and free,
  Cast thy cares before Him, He will comfort thee;
  For the God that planted in thy breast a soul,
  On his sacred tables doth thy name enroll.
  Cheer thine heart, then, mortal, never faithless be,
  He that marks the sparrows will remember thee.”




Chapter XXI. Pebbly Beach


“Now, Mr. Jack, it is a moral impossibility to get all those things into
one trunk, and you mustn't ask it of me,” said Mrs. Pecq, in a tone of
despair, as she surveyed the heap of treasures she was expected to pack
for the boys.

“Never mind the clothes, we only want a boating-suit apiece. Mamma can
put a few collars in her trunk for us; but these necessary things _must_
go,” answered Jack, adding his target and air-pistol to the pile of
bats, fishing-tackle, games, and a choice collection of shabby balls.

“Those are the necessaries and clothes the luxuries, are they? Why don't
you add a velocipede, wheelbarrow, and printing-press, my dear?” asked
Mrs. Pecq, while Jill turned up her nose at “boys' rubbish.”

“Wish I could. Dare say we shall want them. Women don't know what
fellows need, and always must put in a lot of stiff shirts and clean
handkerchiefs and clothes-brushes and pots of cold cream. We are going
to rough it, and don't want any fuss and feathers,” said Jack, beginning
to pack the precious balls in his rubber boots, and strap them up with
the umbrellas, rods, and bats, seeing that there was no hope of a place
in the trunk.

Here Frank came in with two big books, saying calmly, “Just slip these
in somewhere, we shall need them.”

“But you are not to study at all, so you won't want those great
dictionaries,” cried Jill, busily packing her new travelling-basket with
all sorts of little rolls, bags, and boxes.

“They are not dics, but my Encyclopedia. We shall want to know heaps
of things, and this tells about everything. With those books, and a
microscope and a telescope, you could travel round the world, and learn
all you wanted to. Can't possibly get on without them,” said Frank,
fondly patting his favorite work.

“My patience! What queer cattle boys are!” exclaimed Mrs. Pecq, while
they all laughed. “It can't be done, Mr. Frank; all the boxes are brim
full, and you'll have to leave those fat books behind, for there's no
place anywhere.”

“Then I'll carry them myself;” and Frank tucked one under each arm, with
a determined air, which settled the matter.

“I suppose you'll study cockleology instead of boating, and read up
on polywogs while we play tennis, or go poking round with your old
spy-glass instead of having a jolly good time,” said Jack, hauling away
on the strap till all was taut and ship-shape with the bundle.

“Tadpoles don't live in salt water, my son, and if you mean conchology,
you'd better say so. I shall play as much as I wish, and when I want to
know about any new or curious thing, I shall consult my Cyclo, instead
of bothering other people with questions, or giving it up like a dunce;”
 with which crushing reply Frank departed, leaving Jill to pack and
unpack her treasures a dozen times, and Jack to dance jigs on the lids
of the trunks till they would shut.

A very happy party set off the next day, leaving Mrs. Pecq waving her
apron on the steps. Mrs. Minot carried the lunch, Jack his precious
bundle with trifles dropping out by the way, and Jill felt very elegant
bearing her new basket with red worsted cherries bobbing on the outside.
Frank actually did take the Encyclopedia, done up in the roll of shawls,
and whenever the others wondered about anything--tides, lighthouses,
towns, or natural productions--he brought forth one of the books and
triumphantly read therefrom, to the great merriment, if not edification,
of his party.

A very short trip by rail and the rest of the journey by boat, to Jill's
great contentment, for she hated to be shut up; and while the lads roved
here and there she sat under the awning, too happy to talk. But Mrs.
Minot watched with real satisfaction how the fresh wind blew the color
back into the pale cheeks, how the eyes shone and the heart filled with
delight at seeing the lovely world again, and being able to take a share
in its active pleasures.

The Willows was a long, low house close to the beach, and as full as a
beehive of pleasant people, all intent on having a good time. A great
many children were swarming about, and Jill found it impossible to sleep
after her journey, there was such a lively clatter of tongues on the
piazzas, and so many feet going to and fro in the halls. She lay down
obediently while Mrs. Minot settled matters in the two airy rooms and
gave her some dinner, but she kept popping up her head to look out of
the window to see what she could see. Just opposite stood an artist's
cottage and studio, with all manner of charming galleries, towers,
steps, and even a sort of drawbridge to pull up when the painter wished
to be left in peace. He was absent now, and the visitors took possession
of this fine play-place. Children were racing up and down the galleries,
ladies sitting in the tower, boys disporting themselves on the roof, and
young gentlemen preparing for theatricals in the large studio.

“What fun I'll have over there,” thought Jill, watching the merry scene
with intense interest, and wondering if the little girls she saw were as
nice as Molly and Merry.

Then there were glimpses of the sea beyond the green bank where a path
wound along to the beach, whence came the cool dash of waves, and now
and then the glimmer of a passing sail.

“Oh, when can I go out? It looks _so_ lovely, I can't wait long,” she
said, looking as eager as a little gull shut up in a cage and pining for
its home on the wide ocean.

“As soon as it is a little cooler, dear, I'm getting ready for our trip,
but we must be careful and not do too much at once. 'Slow and sure' is
our motto,” answered Mrs. Minot, busily collecting the camp-stools, the
shawls, the air-cushions, and the big parasols.

“I'll be good, only do let me have my sailor-hat to wear, and my new
suit. I'm not a bit tired, and I do want to be like other folks right
off,” said Jill, who had been improving rapidly of late, and felt much
elated at being able to drive out nearly every day, to walk a little,
and sit up some hours without any pain or fatigue.

To gratify her, the blue flannel suit with its white trimming was put
on, and Mamma was just buttoning the stout boots when Jack thundered at
the door, and burst in with all sorts of glorious news.

“Do come out, mother, it's perfectly splendid on the beach! I've found
a nice place for Jill to sit, and it's only a step. Lots of capital
fellows here; one has a bicycle, and is going to teach us to ride. No
end of fun up at the hotel, and every one seems glad to see us. Two
ladies asked about Jill, and one of the girls has got some shells all
ready for her, Gerty Somebody, and her mother is so pretty and jolly,
I like her ever so much. They sit at our table, and Wally is the
boy, younger than I am, but very pleasant. Bacon is the fellow in
knickerbockers; just wish you could see what stout legs he's got! Cox
is the chap for me, though: we are going fishing to-morrow. He's got a
sweet-looking mother, and a sister for you, Jill. Now, then, _do_ come
on, I'll take the traps.”

Off they went, and Jill thought that very short walk to the shore the
most delightful she ever took; for people smiled at the little invalid
as she went slowly by leaning on Mrs. Minot's arm, while Jack pranced in
front, doing the honors, as if he owned the whole Atlantic. A new world
opened to her eyes as they came out upon the pebbly beach full of people
enjoying their afternoon promenade. Jill save one rapturous “Oh!” and
then sat on her stool, forgetting everything but the beautiful blue
ocean rolling away to meet the sky, with nothing to break the wide
expanse but a sail here and there, a point of rocks on one hand, the
little pier on the other, and white gulls skimming by on their wide
wings.

While she sat enjoying herself, Jack showed his mother the place he had
found, and a very nice one it was. Just under the green bank lay an old
boat propped up with some big stones. A willow drooped over it, the tide
rippled up within a few yards of it, and a fine view of the waves could
be seen as they dashed over the rocks at the point.

“Isn't it a good cubby-house? Ben Cox and I fixed it for Jill, and she
can have it for hers. Put her cushions and things there on the sand the
children have thrown in--that will make it soft; then these seats will
do for tables; and up in the bow I'm going to have that old rusty tin
boiler full of salt-water, so she can put seaweed and crabs and all
sorts of chaps in it for an aquarium, you know,” explained Jack, greatly
interested in establishing his family comfortably before he left them.

“There couldn't be a nicer place, and it is very kind of you to get it
ready. Spread the shawls and settle Jill, then you needn't think of us
any more, but go and scramble with Frank. I see him over there with his
spy-glass and some pleasant-looking boys,” said Mamma, bustling about in
great spirits.

So the red cushions were placed, the plaids laid, and the little
work-basket set upon the seat, all ready for Jill, who was charmed with
her nest, and cuddled down under the big parasol, declaring she would
keep house there every day.

Even the old boiler pleased her, and Jack raced over the beach to begin
his search for inhabitants for the new aquarium, leaving Jill to make
friends with some pretty babies digging in the sand, while Mamma sat on
the camp-stool and talked with a friend from Harmony Village.

It seemed as if there could not be anything more delightful than to lie
there lulled by the sound of the sea, watching the sunset and listening
to the pleasant babble of little voices close by. But when they went to
tea in the great hall, with six tables full of merry people, and half a
dozen maids flying about, Jill thought that was even better, because it
was so new to her. Gerty and Wally nodded to her, and their pretty mamma
was so kind and so gay, that Jill could not feel bashful after the first
few minutes, and soon looked about her, sure of seeing friendly faces
everywhere. Frank and Jack ate as if the salt air had already improved
their appetites, and talked about Bacon and Cox as if they had been
bosom friends for years. Mamma was as happy as they, for her friend,
Mrs. Hammond, sat close by; and this rosy lady, who had been a
physician, cheered her up by predicting that Jill would soon be running
about as well as ever.

But the best of all was in the evening, when the elder people gathered
in the parlors and played Twenty Questions, while the children looked
on for an hour before going to bed, much amused at the sight of grown
people laughing, squabbling, dodging, and joking as if they had all
become young again; for, as every one knows, it is impossible to help
lively skirmishes when that game is played. Jill lay in the sofa corner
enjoying it all immensely; for she never saw anything so droll, and
found it capital fun to help guess the thing, or try to puzzle the
opposite side. Her quick wits and bright face attracted people, and
in the pauses of the sport she held quite a levee, for everybody was
interested in the little invalid. The girls shyly made friends in their
own way, the mammas told thrilling tales of the accidents their darlings
had survived, several gentlemen kindly offered their boats, and the
boys, with the best intentions in life, suggested strolls of two or
three miles to Rafe's Chasm and Norman's Woe, or invited her to tennis
and archery, as if violent exercise was the cure for all human ills. She
was very grateful, and reluctantly went away to bed, declaring, when she
got upstairs, that these new friends were the dearest people she ever
met, and the Willows the most delightful place in the whole world.

Next day a new life began for the young folks--a very healthy, happy
life; and all threw themselves into it so heartily, that it was
impossible to help getting great good from it, for these summer weeks,
if well spent, work miracles in tired bodies and souls. Frank took a
fancy to the bicycle boy, and, being able to hire one of the breakneck
articles, soon learned to ride it; and the two might be seen wildly
working their long legs on certain smooth stretches of road, or getting
up their muscle rowing about the bay till they were almost as brown and
nautical in appearance and language as the fishermen who lived in nooks
and corners along the shore.

Jack struck up a great friendship with the sturdy Bacon and the
agreeable Cox: the latter, being about his own age, was his especial
favorite; and they soon were called Box and Cox by the other fellows,
which did not annoy them a bit, as both had played parts in that
immortal farce. They had capital times fishing, scrambling over the
rocks, playing ball and tennis, and rainy days they took possession of
the studio opposite, drew up the portcullis, and gallantly defended
the castle, which some of the others besieged with old umbrellas for
shields, bats for battering-rams, and bunches of burrs for cannon-balls.
Great larks went on over there, while the girls applauded from the
piazza or chamber-windows, and made a gay flag for the victors to
display from the tower when the fight was over.

But Jill had the best time of all, for each day brought increasing
strength and spirits, and she improved so fast it was hard to believe
that she was the same girl who lay so long almost helpless in the Bird
Room at home. Such lively letters as she sent her mother, all about her
new friends, her fine sails, drives, and little walks; the good times
she had in the evening, the lovely things people gave her, and she was
learning to make with shells and sea-weed, and what splendid fun it was
to keep house in a boat.

This last amusement soon grew quite absorbing, and her “cubby,” as she
called it, rapidly became a pretty grotto, where she lived like a little
mermaid, daily loving more and more the beauty of the wonderful sea.
Finding the boat too sunny at times, the boys cut long willow boughs and
arched them over the seats, laying hemlock branches across till a green
roof made it cool and shady inside. There Jill sat or lay among
her cushions reading, trying to sketch, sorting shells, drying gay
sea-weeds, or watching her crabs, jelly-fish, and anemones in the old
boiler, now buried in sand and edged about with moss from the woods.

Nobody disturbed her treasures, but kindly added to them, and often when
she went to her nest she found fruit or flowers, books or bon-bons, laid
ready for her. Every one pitied and liked the bright little girl who
could not run and frisk with the rest, who was so patient and cheerful
after her long confinement, ready to help others, and so grateful
for any small favor. She found now that the weary months had not been
wasted, and was very happy to discover in herself a new sort of strength
and sweetness that was not only a comfort to her, but made those about
her love and trust her. The songs she had learned attracted the babies,
who would leave their play to peep at her and listen when she sung over
her work. Passers-by paused to hear the blithe voice of the bird in the
green cage, and other invalids, strolling on the beach, would take heart
when they saw the child so happy in spite of her great trial.

The boys kept all their marine curiosities for her, and were always
ready to take her a row or a sail, as the bay was safe and that sort
of travelling suited her better than driving. But the girls had capital
times together, and it did Jill good to see another sort from those she
knew at home. She had been so much petted of late, that she was getting
rather vain of her small accomplishments, and being with strangers
richer, better bred and educated than herself, made her more humble in
some things, while it showed her the worth of such virtues as she could
honestly claim. Mamie Cox took her to drive in the fine carriage of her
mamma, and Jill was much impressed by the fact that Mamie was not a bit
proud about it, and did not put on any airs, though she had a maid to
take care of her. Gerty wore pretty costumes, and came down with pink
and blue ribbons in her hair that Jill envied very much; yet Gerty liked
her curls, and longed to have some, while her mother, “the lady from
Philadelphia,” as they called her, was so kind and gay that Jill quite
adored her, and always felt as if sunshine had come into the room when
she entered. Two little sisters were very interesting to her, and made
her long for one of her own when she saw them going about together and
heard them talk of their pleasant home, where the great silk factories
were. But they invited her to come and see the wonderful cocoons, and
taught her to knot pretty gray fringe on a cushion, which delighted her,
being so new and easy. There were several other nice little lasses, and
they all gathered about Jill with the sweet sympathy children are so
quick to show toward those in pain or misfortune. She thought they would
not care for a poor little girl like herself, yet here she was the queen
of the troupe, and this discovery touched and pleased her very much.

In the morning they camped round the boat on the stones with books, gay
work, and merry chatter, till bathing-time. Then the beach was full of
life and fun, for every one looked so droll in the flannel suits, it was
hard to believe that the neat ladies and respectable gentlemen who
went into the little houses could be the same persons as the queer,
short-skirted women with old hats tied down, and bareheaded, barefooted
men in old suits, who came skipping over the sand to disport themselves
in the sea in the most undignified ways. The boys raced about, looking
like circus-tumblers, and the babies were regular little cupids, running
away from the waves that tried to kiss their flying feet.

Some of the young ladies and girls were famous swimmers, and looked very
pretty in their bright red and blue costumes, with loose hair and gay
stockings, as they danced into the water and floated away as fearlessly
as real mermaidens. Jill had her quiet dip and good rubbing each fine
day, and then lay upon the warm sand watching the pranks of the others,
and longing to run and dive and shout and tumble with the rest. Now that
she was among the well and active, it seemed harder to be patient than
when shut up and unable to stir. She felt so much better, and had so
little pain to remind her of past troubles, it was almost impossible to
help forgetting the poor back and letting her recovered spirits run away
with her. If Mrs. Minot had not kept good watch, she would have been
off more than once, so eager was she to be “like other girls” again, so
difficult was it to keep the restless feet quietly folded among the red
cushions.

One day she did yield to temptation, and took a little voyage which
might have been her last, owing to the carelessness of those whom she
trusted. It was a good lesson, and made her as meek as a lamb during the
rest of her stay. Mrs. Minot drove to Gloucester one afternoon, leaving
Jill safely established after her nap in the boat, with Gerty and Mamie
making lace beside her.

“Don't try to walk or run about, my dear. Sit on the piazza if you get
tired of this, and amuse yourself quietly till I come back. I'll not
forget the worsted and the canvas,” said Mamma, peeping over the bank
for a last word as she waited for the omnibus to come along.

“Oh, _don't_ forget the Gibraltars!” cried Jill, popping her head out of
the green roof.

“Nor the bananas, please!” added Gerty, looking round one end.

“Nor the pink and blue ribbon to tie our shell-baskets,” called Mamie,
nearly tumbling into the aquarium at the other end.

Mrs. Minot laughed, and promised, and rumbled away, leaving Jill to an
experience which she never forgot.

For half an hour the little girls worked busily, then the boys came for
Gerty and Mamie to go to the Chasm with a party of friends who were
to leave next day. Off they went, and Jill felt very lonely as the gay
voices died away. Every one had gone somewhere, and only little Harry
Hammond and his maid were on the beach. Two or three sand-pipers ran
about among the pebbles, and Jill envied them their nimble legs so much,
that she could not resist getting up to take a few steps. She longed to
run straight away over the firm, smooth sand, and feel again the delight
of swift motion; but she dared not try it, and stood leaning on her tall
parasol with her book in her hand, when Frank, Jack, and the bicycle boy
came rowing lazily along and hailed her.

“Come for a sail, Jill? Take you anywhere you like,” called Jack,
touched by the lonely figure on the beach.

“I'd love to go, if you will row. Mamma made me promise not to go
sailing without a man to take care of me. Would it spoil your fun to
have me?” answered Jill, eagerly.

“Not a bit; come out on the big stones and we'll take you aboard,” said
Frank, as they steered to the place where she could embark the easiest.

“All the rest are gone to the Chasm. I wanted to go, because I've never
seen it; but, of course, I had to give it up, as I do most of the fun;”
 and Jill sat down with an impatient sigh.

“We'll row you round there. Can't land, but you can see the place and
shout to the others, if that will be any comfort to you,” proposed
Frank, as they pulled away round the pier.

“Oh, yes, that would be lovely!” and Jill smiled at Jack, who was
steering, for she found it impossible to be dismal now with the fresh
wind blowing in her face, the blue waves slapping against the boat, and
three good-natured lads ready to gratify her wishes.

Away they went, laughing and talking gayly till they came to Goodwin's
Rocks, where an unusual number of people were to be seen though the tide
was going out, and no white spray was dashing high into the air to make
a sight worth seeing.

“What do you suppose they are about? Never saw such a lot of folks at
this time. Shouldn't wonder if something had happened. I say, put me
ashore, and I'll cut up and see,” said the bicycle boy, who was of an
inquiring turn.

“I'll go with you,” said Frank; “it won't take but a minute, and I'd
like to discover what it is. May be something we ought to know about.”

So the boys pulled round into a quiet nook, and the two elder ones
scrambled up the rocks, to disappear in the crowd. Five, ten, fifteen
minutes passed, and they did not return. Jack grew impatient, so did
Jill, and bade him run up and bring them back. Glad to know what kept
them, Jack departed, to be swallowed up in his turn, for not a sign of
a boy did she see after that; and, having vainly strained her eyes to
discover the attraction which held them, she gave it up, lay down on
their jackets, and began to read.

Then the treacherous tide, as it ebbed lower and lower down the beach,
began to lure the boat away; for it was not fastened, and when lightened
of its load was an easy prize to the hungry sea, always ready to steal
all it can. Jill knew nothing of this, for her story was dull, the
gentle motion proved soothing, and before she knew it she was asleep.
Little by little the runaway boat slid farther from the shore, and
presently was floating out to sea with its drowsy freight, while the
careless boys, unconscious of the time they were wasting, lingered
to see group after group photographed by the enterprising man who had
trundled his camera to the rocks.

In the midst of a dream about home, Jill was roused by a loud shout,
and, starting up so suddenly that the sun-umbrella went overboard, she
found herself sailing off alone, while the distracted lads roared and
beckoned vainly from the cove. The oars lay at their feet, where they
left them; and the poor child was quite helpless, for she could not
manage the sail, and even the parasol, with which she might have paddled
a little, had gone down with all sail set. For a minute, Jill was so
frightened that she could only look about her with a scared face, and
wonder if drowning was a very disagreeable thing. Then the sight of the
bicycle boy struggling with Jack, who seemed inclined to swim after her,
and Frank shouting wildly, “Hold on! Come back!” made her laugh in spite
of her fear, it was so comical, and their distress so much greater than
hers, since it was their own carelessness which caused the trouble.

“I can't come back! There's nothing to hold on to! You didn't fasten
me, and now I don't know where I'm going!” cried Jill, looking from the
shore to the treacherous sea that was gently carrying her away.

“Keep cool! We'll get a boat and come after you,” roared Frank, before
he followed Jack, who had collected his wits and was tearing up the
rocks like a chamois hunter.

The bicycle boy calmly sat down to keep his eye on the runaway,
calling out from time to time such cheering remarks as “All aboard for
Liverpool! Give my love to Victoria! Luff and bear away when you come
to Halifax! If you are hard up for provisions, you'll find an apple and
some bait in my coat-pocket,” and other directions for a comfortable
voyage, till his voice was lost in the distance as a stronger current
bore her swiftly away and the big waves began to tumble and splash.

At first Jill had laughed at his efforts to keep up her spirits, but
when the boat floated round a point of rock that shut in the cove, she
felt all alone, and sat quite still, wondering what would become of her.
She turned her back to the sea and looked at the dear, safe land, which
never had seemed so green and beautiful before. Up on the hill rustled
the wood through which the happy party were wandering to the Chasm.
On the rocks she still saw the crowd all busy with their own affairs,
unconscious of her danger. Here and there artists were sketching
in picturesque spots, and in one place an old gentleman sat fishing
peacefully. Jill called and waved her handkerchief, but he never looked
up, and an ugly little dog barked at her in what seemed to her a most
cruel way.

“Nobody sees or hears or cares, and those horrid boys will never catch
up!” she cried in despair, as the boat began to rock more and more, and
the loud swash of water dashing in and out of the Chasm drew nearer and
nearer. Holding on now with both hands she turned and looked straight
before her, pale and shivering, while her eyes tried to see some sign of
hope among the steep cliffs that rose up on the left. No one was there,
though usually at this hour they were full of visitors, and it was time
for the walkers to have arrived.

“I wonder if Gerty and Mamie will be sorry if I'm drowned,” thought
Jill, remembering the poor girl who had been lost in the Chasm not long
ago. Her lively fancy pictured the grief of her friends at her loss; but
that did not help or comfort her now, and as her anxious gaze wandered
along the shore, she said aloud, in a pensive tone,--

“Perhaps I shall be wrecked on Norman's Woe, and somebody will make
poetry about me. It would be pretty to read, but I don't want to die
that way. Oh, why did I come! Why didn't I stay safe and comfortable in
my own boat?”

At the thought a sob rose, and poor Jill laid her head down on her lap
to cry with all her heart, feeling very helpless, small, and forsaken
alone there on the great sea. In the midst of her tears came the
thought, “When people are in danger, they ask God to save them;” and,
slipping down upon her knees, she said her prayer as she had never said
it before, for when human help seems gone we turn to Him as naturally as
lost children cry to their father, and feel sure that he will hear and
answer them.

After that she felt better, and wiped away the drops that blinded her,
to look out again like a shipwrecked mariner watching for a sail. And
there it was! Close by, coming swiftly on with a man behind it, a sturdy
brown fisher, busy with his lobster-pots, and quite unconscious how like
an angel he looked to the helpless little girl in the rudderless boat.

“Hi! hi! Oh, please do stop and get me! I'm lost, no oars, nobody to
fix the sail! Oh, oh! please come!” screamed Jill, waving her hat
frantically as the other boat skimmed by and the man stared at her as if
she really was a mermaid with a fishy tail.

“Keep still! I'll come about and fetch you!” he called out; and Jill
obeyed, sitting like a little image of faith, till with a good deal of
shifting and flapping of the sail, the other boat came alongside and
took her in tow.

A few words told the story, and in five minutes she was sitting snugly
tucked up watching an unpleasant mass of lobsters flap about dangerously
near her toes, while the boat bounded over the waves with a delightful
motion, and every instant brought her nearer home. She did not say much,
but felt a good deal; and when they met two boats coming to meet her,
manned by very anxious crews of men and boys, she was so pale and quiet
that Jack was quite bowed down with remorse, and Frank nearly pitched
the bicycle boy overboard because he gayly asked Jill how she left her
friends in England. There was great rejoicing over her, for the people
on the rocks had heard of her loss, and ran about like ants when their
hill is disturbed. Of course half a dozen amiable souls posted off to
the Willows to tell the family that the little girl was drowned, so that
when the rescuers appeared quite a crowd was assembled on the beach
to welcome her. But Jill felt so used up with her own share of the
excitement that she was glad to be carried to the house by Frank and
Jack, and laid upon her bed, where Mrs. Hammond soon restored her with
sugar-coated pills, and words even sweeter and more soothing.

Other people, busied with their own pleasures, forgot all about it by
the next day; but Jill remembered that hour long afterward, both awake
and asleep, for her dreams were troubled, and she often started up
imploring someone to save her. Then she would recall the moment when,
feeling most helpless, she had asked for help, and it had come as
quickly as if that tearful little cry had been heard and answered,
though her voice had been drowned by the dash of the waves that seemed
ready to devour her. This made a deep impression on her, and a sense of
childlike faith in the Father of all began to grow up within her; for
in that lonely voyage, short as it was, she had found a very precious
treasure to keep for ever, to lean on, and to love during the longer
voyage which all must take before we reach our home.




Chapter XXII. A Happy Day


“Oh dear! Only a week more, and then we must go back. Don't you hate the
thoughts of it?” said Jack, as he was giving Jill her early walk on the
beach one August morning.

“Yes, it will be dreadful to leave Gerty and Mamie and all the nice
people. But I'm so much better I won't have to be shut up again, even if
I don't go to school. How I long to see Merry and Molly. Dear things, if
it wasn't for them I should hate going home more than you do,” answered
Jill, stepping along quite briskly, and finding it very hard to resist
breaking into a skip or a run, she felt so well and gay.

“Wish they could be here to-day to see the fun,” said Jack, for it was
the anniversary of the founding of the place, and the people celebrated
it by all sorts of festivity.

“I did want to ask Molly, but your mother is so good to me I couldn't
find courage to do it. Mammy told me not to ask for a thing, and I'm
sure I don't get a chance. I feel just as if I was your truly born
sister, Jack.”

“That's all right, I'm glad you do,” answered Jack, comfortably, though
his mind seemed a little absent and his eyes twinkled when she spoke of
Molly. “Now, you sit in the cubby-house, and keep quiet till the boat
comes in. Then the fun will begin, and you must be fresh and ready to
enjoy it. Don't run off, now, I shall want to know where to find you by
and by.”

“No more running off, thank you. I'll stay here till you come, and
finish this box for Molly; she has a birthday this week, and I've
written to ask what day, so I can send it right up and surprise her.”

Jack's eyes twinkled more than ever as he helped Jill settle herself in
the boat, and then with a whoop he tore over the beach, as if practising
for the race which was to come off in the afternoon.

Jill was so busy with her work that time went quickly, and the early
boat came in just as the last pink shell was stuck in its place. Putting
the box in the sun to dry, she leaned out of her nook to watch the gay
parties land, and go streaming up the pier along the road that went
behind the bank that sheltered her. Flocks of children were running
about on the sand, and presently strangers appeared, eager to see and
enjoy all the delights of this gala-day.

“There's a fat little boy who looks ever so much like Boo,” said Jill
to herself, watching the people and hoping they would not come and find
her, since she had promised to stay till Jack returned.

The fat little boy was staring about him in a blissful sort of maze,
holding a wooden shovel in one hand and the skirts of a young girl with
the other. Her back was turned to Jill, but something in the long
brown braid with a fly-away blue bow hanging down her back looked very
familiar to Jill. So did the gray suit and the Japanese umbrella; but
the hat was strange, and while she was thinking how natural the boots
looked, the girl turned round.

“Why, how much she looks like Molly! It can't be--yes, it might, I do
believe it _is_!” cried Jill, starting up and hardly daring to trust her
own eyes.

As she came out of her nest and showed herself, there could be no doubt
about the other girl, for she gave one shout and came racing over the
beach with both arms out, while her hat blew off unheeded, and the gay
umbrella flew away, to the great delight of all the little people except
Boo, who was upset by his sister's impetuous rush, and lay upon his
back howling. Molly did not do all the running, though, and Jill got her
wish, for, never stopping to think of herself, she was off at once, and
met her friend half-way with an answering cry. It was a pretty sight to
see them run into one another's arms and hug and kiss and talk and skip
in such a state of girlish joy they never cared who saw or laughed at
their innocent raptures.

“You darling dear! where did you come from?” cried Jill, holding Molly
by both shoulders, and shaking her a little to be sure she was real.

“Mrs. Minot sent for us to spend a week. You look so well, I can't
believe my eyes!” answered Molly, patting Jill's cheeks and kissing them
over and over, as if to make sure the bright color would not come off.

“A week? How splendid! Oh, I've such heaps to tell and show you; come
right over to my cubby and see how lovely it is,” said Jill, forgetting
everybody else in her delight at getting Molly.

“I must get poor Boo, and my hat and umbrella, I left them all behind me
when I saw you,” laughed Molly, looking back.

But Mrs. Minot and Jack had consoled Boo and collected the scattered
property, so the girls went on arm in arm, and had a fine time before
any one had the heart to disturb them. Molly was charmed with the boat,
and Jill very glad the box was done in season. Both had so much to
tell and hear and plan, that they would have sat there for ever if
bathing-time had not come, and the beach suddenly looked like a bed of
red and yellow tulips, for every one took a dip, and the strangers added
much to the fun.

Molly could swim like a duck, and quite covered herself with glory by
diving off the pier. Jack undertook to teach Boo, who was a promising
pupil, being so plump that he could not sink if he tried. Jill was soon
through, and lay on the sand enjoying the antics of the bathers till she
was so faint with laughter she was glad to hear the dinner-horn and do
the honors of the Willows to Molly, whose room was next hers.

Boat-races came first in the afternoon, and the girls watched them,
sitting luxuriously in the nest, with the ladies and children close by.
The sailing-matches were very pretty to see; but Molly and Jill were
more interested in the rowing, for Frank and the bicycle boy pulled one
boat, and the friends felt that this one must win. It did, though the
race was not very exciting nor the prize of great worth; but the boys
and girls were satisfied, and Jack was much exalted, for he always told
Frank he could do great things if he would only drop books and “go in on
his muscle.”

Foot-races followed, and, burning to distinguish himself also, Jack
insisted on trying, though his mother warned him that the weak leg might
be harmed, and he had his own doubts about it, as he was all out of
practice. However, he took his place with a handkerchief tied round his
head, red shirt and stockings, and his sleeves rolled up as if he meant
business. Jill and Molly could not sit still during this race, and stood
on the bank quite trembling with excitement as the half-dozen runners
stood in a line at the starting-post waiting for the word “Go!”

Off they went at last over the smooth beach to the pole with the flag
at the further end, and every one watched them with mingled interest
and merriment, for they were a droll set, and the running not at all
scientific with most of them. One young fisherman with big boots over
his trousers started off at a great pace, pounding along in the most
dogged way, while a little chap in a tight bathing-suit with very thin
legs skimmed by him, looking so like a sand-piper it was impossible to
help laughing at both. Jack's former training stood him in good stead
now; for he went to work in professional style, and kept a steady trot
till the flagpole had been passed, then he put on his speed and shot
ahead of all the rest, several of whom broke down and gave up. But Cox
and Bacon held on gallantly; and soon it was evident that the sturdy
legs in the knickerbockers were gaining fast, for Jack gave his ankle an
ugly wrench on a round pebble, and the weak knee began to fail. He
did his best, however, and quite a breeze of enthusiasm stirred the
spectators as the three boys came down the course like mettlesome
horses, panting, pale, or purple, but each bound to win at any cost.

“Now, Bacon!” “Go it, Minot!” “Hit him up, Cox!” “Jack's ahead!” “No, he
isn't!” “Here they come!” “Bacon's done it!” shouted the other boys, and
they were right; Bacon had won, for the gray legs came in just half a
yard ahead of the red ones, and Minot tumbled into his brother's arms
with hardly breath enough left to gasp out, good-humoredly, “All right,
I'm glad he beat!”

Then the victor was congratulated and borne off by his friends to
refresh himself, while the lookers-on scattered to see a game of tennis
and the shooting of the Archery Club up at the hotel. Jack was soon
rested, and, making light of his defeat, insisted on taking the girls to
see the fun. So they drove up in the old omnibus, and enjoyed the pretty
sight very much; for the young ladies were in uniform, and the broad
green ribbons over the white dresses, the gay quivers, long bows, and
big targets, made a lively scene. The shooting was good; a handsome
damsel got the prize of a dozen arrows, and every one clapped in the
most enthusiastic manner.

Molly and Jill did not care about tennis, so they went home to rest
and dress for the evening, because to their minds the dancing, the
illumination, and the fireworks were the best fun of all. Jill's white
bunting with cherry ribbons was very becoming, and the lively feet in
the new slippers patted the floor impatiently as the sound of dance
music came down to the Willows after tea, and the other girls waltzed on
the wide piazza because they could not keep still.

“No dancing for me, but Molly must have a good time. You'll see that she
does, won't you, boys?” said Jill, who knew that her share of the fun
would be lying on a settee and watching the rest enjoy her favorite
pastime.

Frank and Jack promised, and kept their word handsomely; for there was
plenty of room in the great dancing-hall at the hotel, and the band in
the pavilion played such inspiring music that, as the bicycle boy said,
“Every one who had a leg couldn't help shaking it.” Molly was twirled
about to her heart's content, and flew hither and thither like a blue
butterfly; for all the lads liked her, and she kept running up to tell
Jill the funny things they said and did.

As night darkened from all the houses in the valley, on the cliffs and
along the shore lights shone and sparkled; for every one decorated with
gay lanterns, and several yachts in the bay strung colored lamps about
the little vessels, making a pretty picture on the quiet sea. Jill
thought she had never seen anything so like fairy-land, and felt very
like one in a dream as she drove slowly up and down with Mamie, Gerty,
Molly, and Mrs. Cox in the carriage, so that she might see it all
without too much fatigue. It was very lovely; and when rockets began
to whizz, filling the air with golden rain, a shower of colored stars,
fiery dragons, or glittering wheels, the girls could only shriek with
delight, and beg to stay a little longer each time the prudent lady
proposed going home.

It had to be at last; but Molly and Jill comforted themselves by a long
talk in bed, for it was impossible to sleep with glares of light coming
every few minutes, flocks of people talking and tramping by in the road,
and bursts of music floating down to them as the older but not wiser
revellers kept up the merriment till a late hour. They dropped off at
last; but Jill had the nightmare, and Molly was waked up by a violent
jerking of her braid as Jill tried to tow her along, dreaming she was a
boat.

They were too sleepy to laugh much then, but next morning they made
merry over it, and went to breakfast with such happy faces that all the
young folks pronounced Jill's friend a most delightful girl. What a good
time Molly did have that week! Other people were going to leave also,
and therefore much picnicking, boating, and driving was crowded into
the last days. Clambakes on the shore, charades in the studio,
sewing-parties at the boat, evening frolics in the big dining-room,
farewell calls, gifts, and invitations, all sorts of plans for next
summer, and vows of eternal friendship exchanged between people who
would soon forget each other. It was very pleasant, till poor Boo
innocently added to the excitement by poisoning a few of his neighbors
with a bad lobster.

The ambitious little soul pined to catch one of these mysterious but
lovely red creatures, and spent days fishing on the beach, investigating
holes and corners, and tagging after the old man who supplied the house.
One day after a high wind he found several “lobs” washed up on the
beach, and, though disappointed at their color, he picked out a big one,
and set off to show his prize to Molly. Half-way home he met the old
man on his way with a basket of fish, and being tired of lugging his
contribution laid it with the others, meaning to explain later. No one
saw him do it, as the old man was busy with his pipe; and Boo ran back
to get more dear lobs, leaving his treasure to go into the kettle and
appear at supper, by which time he had forgotten all about it.

Fortunately none of the children ate any, but several older people were
made ill, and quite a panic prevailed that night as one after the other
called up the doctor, who was boarding close by; and good Mrs. Grey,
the hostess, ran about with hot flannels, bottles of medicine, and
distracted messages from room to room. All were comfortable by morning,
but the friends of the sufferers lay in wait for the old fisherman,
and gave him a good scolding for his carelessness. The poor man was
protesting his innocence when Boo, who was passing by, looked into the
basket, and asked what had become of his lob. A few questions brought
the truth to light, and a general laugh put every one in good humor,
when poor Boo mildly said, by way of explanation,--

“I fought I was helpin' Mrs. Dray, and I did want to see the dreen lob
come out all red when she boiled him. But I fordot, and I don't fink
I'll ever find such a nice big one any more.”

“For our sakes, I hope you won't, my dear,” said Mrs. Hammond, who had
been nursing one of the sufferers.

“It's lucky we are going home to-morrow, or that child would be the
death of himself and everybody else. He is perfectly crazy about fish,
and I've pulled him out of that old lobster-pot on the beach a dozen
times,” groaned Molly, much afflicted by the mishaps of her young
charge.

There was a great breaking up next day, and the old omnibus went off to
the station with Bacon hanging on behind, the bicycle boy and his
iron whirligig atop, and heads popping out of all the windows for last
good-byes. Our party and the Hammonds were going by boat, and were all
ready to start for the pier when Boo and little Harry were missing.
Molly, the maid, and both boys ran different ways to find them; and all
sorts of dreadful suggestions were being made when shouts of laughter
were heard from the beach, and the truants appeared, proudly dragging
in Harry's little wagon a dead devil-fish, as the natives call that ugly
thing which looks like a magnified tadpole--all head and no body.

“We've dot him!” called the innocents, tugging up their prize with such
solemn satisfaction it was impossible to help laughing.

“I always wanted to tatch a whale, and this is a baby one, I fink. A boy
said, when they wanted to die they comed on the sand and did it, and we
saw this one go dead just now. Ain't he pretty?” asked Boo, displaying
the immense mouth with fond pride, while his friend flapped the tail.

“What are you going to do with him?” said Mrs. Hammond, regarding her
infant as if she often asked herself the same question about her boy.

“Wap him up in a paper and tate him home to pay wid,” answered Harry,
with such confidence in his big blue eyes that it was very hard to
disappoint his hopes and tell him the treasure must be left behind.

Wails of despair burst from both children as the hard-hearted boys
tipped out the little whale, and hustled the indignant fishermen on
board the boat, which had been whistling for them impatiently. Boo
recovered his spirits first, and gulping down a sob that nearly shook
his hat off, consoled his companion in affliction and convulsed his
friends by taking from his pocket several little crabs, the remains of
a jelly-fish, and such a collection of pebbles that Frank understood why
he found the fat boy such a burden when he shouldered him, kicking and
howling, in the late run to the boat. These delicate toys healed the
wounds of Boo and Harry, and they were soon happily walking the little
“trabs” about inside a stone wall of their own building, while the
others rested after their exertions, and laid plans for coming to the
Willows another year, as people usually did who had once tasted the
wholesome delights and cordial hospitality of this charming place.




Chapter XXIII. Cattle Show


The children were not the only ones who had learned something at
Pebbly Beach. Mrs. Minot had talked a good deal with some very superior
persons, and received light upon various subjects which had much
interested or perplexed her. While the ladies worked or walked together,
they naturally spoke oftenest and most earnestly about their children,
and each contributed her experience. Mrs. Hammond, who had been a
physician for many years, was wise in the care of healthy little bodies,
and the cure of sick ones. Mrs. Channing, who had read, travelled, and
observed much in the cause of education, had many useful hints about
the training of young minds and hearts. Several teachers reported their
trials, and all the mothers were eager to know how to bring up their
boys and girls to be healthy, happy, useful men and women.

As young people do not care for such discussions, we will not describe
them, but as the impression they made upon one of the mammas affected
our hero and heroine, we must mention the changes which took place in
their life when they all got home again.

“School begins to-morrow. Oh, dear!” sighed Jack, as he looked up his
books in the Bird Room, a day or two after their return.

“Don't you want to go? I long to, but don't believe I shall. I saw our
mothers talking to the doctor last night, but I haven't dared to ask
what they decided,” said Jill, affectionately eying the long-unused
books in her little library.

“I've had such a jolly good time, that I hate to be shut up all day
worse than ever. Don't you, Frank?” asked Jack, with a vengeful slap at
the arithmetic which was the torment of his life.

“Well, I confess I don't hanker for school as much as I expected. I'd
rather take a spin on the old bicycle. Our roads are so good, it is a
great temptation to hire a machine, and astonish the natives. That's
what comes of idleness. So brace up, my boy, and go to work, for
vacation is over,” answered Frank, gravely regarding the tall pile of
books before him, as if trying to welcome his old friends, or tyrants,
rather, for they ruled him with a rod of iron when he once gave himself
up to them.

“Ah, but vacation is not over, my dears,” said Mrs. Minot, hearing the
last words as she came in prepared to surprise her family.

“Glad of it. How much longer is it to be?” asked Jack, hoping for a week
at least.

“Two or three years for some of you.”

“What?” cried all three, in utter astonishment, as they stared at Mamma,
who could not help smiling, though she was very much in earnest.

“For the next two or three years I intend to cultivate my boys' bodies,
and let their minds rest a good deal, from books at least. There is
plenty to learn outside of school-houses, and I don't mean to shut you
up just when you most need all the air and exercise you can get. Good
health, good principles, and a good education are the three blessings
I ask for you, and I am going to make sure of the first, as a firm
foundation for the other two.”

“But, mother, what becomes of college?” asked Frank, rather disturbed at
this change of base.

“Put it off for a year, and see if you are not better fitted for it then
than now.”

“But I am already fitted: I've worked like a tiger all this year, and
I'm sure I shall pass.”

“Ready in one way, but not in another. That hard work is no preparation
for four years of still harder study. It has cost you these round
shoulders, many a headache, and consumed hours when you had far better
have been on the river or in the fields. I cannot have you break down,
as so many boys do, or pull through at the cost of ill-health afterward.
Eighteen is young enough to begin the steady grind, if you have a strong
constitution to keep pace with the eager mind. Sixteen is too young to
send even my good boy out into the world, just when he most needs his
mother's care to help him be the man she hopes to see him.”

Mrs. Minot laid her hand on his shoulder as she spoke, looking so fond
and proud that it was impossible to rebel, though some of his most
cherished plans were spoilt.

“Other fellows go at my age, and I was rather pleased to be ready at
sixteen,” he began. But she added, quickly,--

“They go, but how do they come out? Many lose health of body, and many
what is more precious still, moral strength, because too young and
ignorant to withstand temptations of all sorts. The best part of
education does not come from books, and the good principles I value more
than either of the other things are to be carefully watched over till
firmly fixed; then you may face the world, and come to no real harm.
Trust me, dear, I do it for your sake; so bear the disappointment
bravely, and in the end I think you will say I'm right.”

“I'll do my best; but I don't see what is to become of us if we don't go
to school. You will get tired of it first,” said Frank, trying to set
a good example to the others, who were looking much impressed and
interested.

“No danger of that, for I never sent my children to school to get rid of
them, and now that they are old enough to be companions, I want them
at home more than ever. There are to be some lessons, however, for busy
minds must be fed, but not crammed; so you boys will go and recite at
certain hours such things as seem most important. But there is to be
no studying at night, no shutting up all the best hours of the day, no
hurry and fret of getting on fast, or skimming over the surface of many
studies without learning any thoroughly.”

“So I say!” cried Jack, pleased with the new idea, for he never did love
books. “I do hate to be driven so I don't half understand, because there
is no time to have things explained. School is good fun as far as
play goes; but I don't see the sense of making a fellow learn eighty
questions in geography one day, and forget them the next.

“What is to become of me, please?” asked Jill, meekly.

“You and Molly are to have lessons here. I was a teacher when I was
young, you know, and liked it, so I shall be school-ma'am, and leave my
house-keeping in better hands than mine. I always thought that mothers
should teach their girls during these years, and vary their studies to
suit the growing creatures as only mothers can.

“That will be splendid! Will Molly's father let her come?” cried Jill,
feeling quite reconciled to staying at home, if her friend was to be
with her.

“He likes the plan very much, for Molly is growing fast, and needs a
sort of care that Miss Dawes cannot give her. I am not a hard mistress,
and I hope you will find my school a pleasant one.”

“I know I shall; and I'm not disappointed, because I was pretty sure I
couldn't go to the old school again, when I heard the doctor say I must
be very careful for a long time. I thought he meant months; but if it
must be years, I can bear it, for I've been happy this last one though
I was sick,” said Jill, glad to show that it had not been wasted time by
being cheerful and patient now.

“That's my good girl!” and Mrs. Minot stroked the curly black head as if
it was her own little daughter's. “You have done so well, I want you to
go on improving, for care now will save you pain and disappointment by
and by. You all have got a capital start during these six weeks, so it
is a good time to begin my experiment. If it does not work well, we will
go back to school and college next spring.”

“Hurrah for Mamma and the long vacation!” cried Jack, catching up two
big books and whirling them round like clubs, as if to get his muscles
in order at once.

“Now I shall have time to go to the Gymnasium and straighten out my
back,” said Frank, who was growing so tall he needed more breadth to
make his height symmetrical.

“And to ride horseback. I am going to hire old Jane and get out the
little phaeton, so we can all enjoy the fine weather while it lasts.
Molly and I can drive Jill, and you can take turns in the saddle when
you are tired of ball and boating. Exercise of all sorts is one of the
lessons we are to learn,” said Mrs. Minot, suggesting all the pleasant
things she could to sweeten the pill for her pupils, two of whom did
love their books, not being old enough to know that even an excellent
thing may be overdone.

“Won't that be gay? I'll get down the saddle to-day, so we can begin
right off. Lem rides, and we can go together. Hope old Jane will like it
as well as I shall,” said Jack, who had found a new friend in a pleasant
lad lately come to town.

“You must see that she does, for you boys are to take care of her. We
will put the barn in order, and you can decide which shall be hostler
and which gardener, for I don't intend to hire labor on the place any
more. Our estate is not a large one, and it will be excellent work for
you, my men.”

“All right! I'll see to Jane. I love horses,” said Jack, well pleased
with the prospect.

“My horse won't need much care. I prefer a bicycle to a beast, so I'll
get in the squashes, pick the apples, and cover the strawberry bed when
it is time,” added Frank, who had enjoyed the free life at Pebbly Beach
so much that he was willing to prolong it.

“You may put me in a hen-coop, and keep me there a year, if you like.
I won't fret, for I'm sure you know what is best for me,” said Jill,
gayly, as she looked up at the good friend who had done so much for her.

“I'm not sure that I won't put you in a pretty cage and send you to
Cattle Show, as a sample of what we can do in the way of taming a wild
bird till it is nearly as meek as a dove,” answered Mrs. Minot, much
gratified at the amiability of her flock.

“I don't see why there should not be an exhibition of children, and
prizes for the good and pretty ones, as well as for fat pigs, fine
horses, or handsome fruit and flowers--I don't mean a baby show, but
boys and girls, so people can see what the prospect is of a good crop
for the next generation,” said Frank, glancing toward the tower of the
building where the yearly Agricultural Fair was soon to be held.

“Years ago, there was a pretty custom here of collecting all the schools
together in the spring, and having a festival at the Town Hall. Each
school showed its best pupils, and the parents looked on at the blooming
flower show. It was a pity it was ever given up, for the schools have
never been so good as then, nor the interest in them so great;” and Mrs.
Minot wondered, as many people do, why farmers seem to care more for
their cattle and crops than for their children, willingly spending large
sums on big barns and costly experiments, while the school-houses are
shabby and inconvenient, and the cheapest teachers preferred.

“Ralph is going to send my bust. He asked if he might, and mother said
Yes. Mr. German thinks it very good, and I hope other people will,” said
Jill, nodding toward the little plaster head that smiled down from its
bracket with her own merry look.

“I could send my model; it is nearly done. Ralph told me it was a clever
piece of work, and he knows,” added Frank, quite taken with the idea of
exhibiting his skill in mechanics.

“And I could send my star bedquilt! They always have things of that kind
at Cattle Show;” and Jill began to rummage in the closet for the pride
of her heart, burning to display it to an admiring world.

“I haven't got anything. Can't sew rags together; or make baby engines,
and I have no live-stock--yes, I have too! There's old Bun. I'll send
him, for the fun of it; he really is a curiosity, for he is the biggest
one I ever saw, and hopping into the lime has made his fur such a queer
color, he looks like a new sort of rabbit. I'll catch and shut him up
before he gets wild again;” and off rushed Jack to lure unsuspecting
old Bun, who had grown tame during their absence, into the cage which he
detested.

They all laughed at his ardor, but the fancy pleased them; and as Mamma
saw no reason why their little works of art should not be sent, Frank
fell to work on his model, and Jill resolved to finish her quilt at
once, while Mrs. Minot went off to see Mr. Acton about the hours and
studies for the boys.

In a week or two, the young people were almost resigned to the loss of
school, for they found themselves delightfully fresh for the few lessons
they did have, and not weary of play, since it took many useful forms.
Old Jane not only carried them all to ride, but gave Jack plenty of work
keeping her premises in nice order. Frank mourned privately over the
delay of college, but found a solace in his whirligig and the Gymnasium,
where he set himself to developing a chest to match the big head above,
which head no longer ached with eight or ten hours of study. Harvesting
beans and raking up leaves seemed to have a soothing effect upon his
nerves, for now he fell asleep at once instead of thumping his pillow
with vexation because his brain would go on working at difficult
problems and passages when he wanted it to stop.

Jill and Molly drove away in the little phaeton every fair morning over
the sunny hills and through the changing woods, filling their hands with
asters and golden-rod, their lungs with the pure, invigorating air, and
their heads with all manner of sweet and happy fancies and feelings born
of the wholesome influences about them. People shook their heads, and
said it was wasting time; but the rosy-faced girls were content to trust
those wiser than themselves, and found their new school very pleasant.
They read aloud a good deal, rapidly acquiring one of the rarest and
most beautiful accomplishments; for they could stop and ask questions as
they went along, so that they understood what they read, which is half
the secret. A thousand things came up as they sewed together in the
afternoon, and the eager minds received much general information in an
easy and well-ordered way. Physiology was one of the favorite studies,
and Mrs. Hammond often came in to give them a little lecture, teaching
them to understand the wonders of their own systems, and how to keep
them in order--a lesson of far more importance just then than Greek or
Latin, for girls are the future mothers, nurses, teachers, of the race,
and should feel how much depends on them. Merry could not resist the
attractions of the friendly circle, and soon persuaded her mother to let
her do as they did; so she got more exercise and less study, which was
just what the delicate girl needed.

The first of the new ideas seemed to prosper, and the second, though
suggested in joke, was carried out in earnest, for the other young
people were seized with a strong desire to send something to the
Fair. In fact, all sorts of queer articles were proposed, and much fun
prevailed, especially among the boys, who ransacked their gardens for
mammoth vegetables, sighed for five-legged calves, blue roses, or
any other natural curiosity by means of which they might distinguish
themselves. Ralph was the only one who had anything really worth
sending; for though Frank's model seemed quite perfect, it obstinately
refused to go, and at the last moment blew up with a report like a
pop-gun. So it was laid away for repairs, and its disappointed maker
devoted his energies to helping Jack keep Bun in order; for that
indomitable animal got out of every prison they put him in, and led Jack
a dreadful life during that last week. At all hours of the day and night
that distracted boy would start up, crying, “There he is again!” and
dart out to give chase and capture the villain now grown too fat to run
as he once did.

The very night before the Fair, Frank was wakened by a chilly draught,
and, getting up to see where it came from, found Jack's door open and
bed empty, while the vision of a white ghost flitting about the garden
suggested a midnight rush after old Bun. Frank watched laughingly,
till poor Jack came toward the house with the gentleman in gray kicking
lustily in his arms, and then whispered in a sepulchral tone,--

“Put him in the old refrigerator, he can't get out of that.”

Blessing him for the suggestion, the exhausted hunter shut up his victim
in the new cell, and found it a safe one, for Bun could not burrow
through a sheet of zinc, or climb up the smooth walls.

Jill's quilt was a very elaborate piece of work, being bright blue with
little white stars all over it; this she finished nicely, and felt sure
no patient old lady could outdo it. Merry decided to send butter, for
she had been helping her mother in the dairy that summer, and rather
liked the light part of the labor. She knew it would please her very
much if she chose that instead of wild flowers, so she practised
moulding the yellow pats into pretty shapes, that it might please both
eye and taste.

Molly declared she would have a little pen, and put Boo in it, as the
prize fat boy--a threat which so alarmed the innocent that he ran away,
and was found two or three miles from home, asleep under the wall,
with two seed-cakes and a pair of socks done up in a bundle. Being with
difficulty convinced that it was a joke, he consented to return to his
family, but was evidently suspicious, till Molly decided to send her
cats, and set about preparing them for exhibition. The Minots' deserted
Bunny-house was rather large; but as cats cannot be packed as closely as
much-enduring sheep, Molly borrowed this desirable family mansion, and
put her darlings into it, where they soon settled down, and appeared
to enjoy their new residence. It had been scrubbed up and painted red,
cushions and plates put in, and two American flags adorned the roof.
Being barred all round, a fine view of the Happy Family could be had,
now twelve in number, as Molasses had lately added three white kits to
the varied collection.

The girls thought this would be the most interesting spectacle of all,
and Grif proposed to give some of the cats extra tails, to increase
their charms, especially poor Mortification, who would appreciate the
honor of two, after having none for so long. But Molly declined, and
Grif looked about him for some attractive animal to exhibit, so that he
too might go in free and come to honor, perhaps.

A young lady in the town owned a donkey, a small, gray beast, who
insisted on tripping along the sidewalks and bumping her rider against
the walls as she paused to browse at her own sweet will, regardless of
blows or cries, till ready to move on. Expressing great admiration for
this rare animal, Grif obtained leave to display the charms of Graciosa
at the Fair. Little did she guess the dark designs entertained against
her dignity, and happily she was not as sensitive to ridicule as a less
humble-minded animal, so she went willingly with her new friend, and
enjoyed the combing and trimming up which she received at his hands,
while he prepared for the great occasion.

When the morning of September 28th arrived, the town was all astir,
and the Fair ground a lively scene. The air was full of the lowing of
cattle, the tramp of horses, squealing of indignant pigs, and clatter of
tongues, as people and animals streamed in at the great gate and found
their proper places. Our young folks were in a high state of excitement,
as they rumbled away with their treasures in a hay-cart. The Bunny-house
might have been a cage of tigers, so rampant were the cats at this
new move. Old Bun, in a small box, brooded over the insult of the
refrigerator, and looked as fierce as a rabbit could. Gus had a coop of
rare fowls, who clucked wildly all the way, while Ralph, with the bust
in his arms, stood up in front, and Jill and Molly bore the precious
bedquilt, as they sat behind.

These objects of interest were soon arranged, and the girls went to
admire Merry's golden butter cups among the green leaves, under which
lay the ice that kept the pretty flowers fresh. The boys were down
below, where the cackling was very loud, but not loud enough to drown
the sonorous bray which suddenly startled them as much as it did the
horses outside. A shout of laughter followed, and away went the lads, to
see what the fun was, while the girls ran out on the balcony, as someone
said, “It's that rogue of a Grif with some new joke.”

It certainly was, and, to judge from the peals of merriment, the joke
was a good one. In at the gate came a two-headed donkey, ridden by Grif,
in great spirits at his success, for the gate-keeper laughed so he never
thought to ask for toll. A train of boys followed him across the ground,
lost in admiration of the animal and the cleverness of her rider. Among
the stage properties of the Dramatic Club was the old ass's head once
used in some tableaux from “Midsummer Night's Dream.” This Grif
had mended up, and fastened by means of straps and a collar to poor
Graciosa's neck, hiding his work with a red cloth over her back. One eye
was gone, but the other still opened and shut, and the long ears wagged
by means of strings, which he slyly managed with the bridle, so the
artificial head looked almost as natural as the real one. The funniest
thing of all was the innocent air of Graciosa, and the mildly inquiring
expression with which she now and then turned to look at or to smell of
the new ornament as if she recognized a friend's face, yet was perplexed
by its want of animation. She vented her feelings in a bray, which Grif
imitated, convulsing all hearers by the sound as well as by the wink
the one eye gave, and the droll waggle of one erect ear, while the other
pointed straight forward.

The girls laughed so at the ridiculous sight that they nearly fell
over the railing, and the boys were in ecstasies, especially when
Grif, emboldened by his success, trotted briskly round the race-course,
followed by the cheers of the crowd. Excited by the noise, Graciosa did
her best, till the false head, loosened by the rapid motion, slipped
round under her nose, causing her to stop so suddenly that Grif flew
off, alighting on his own head with a violence which would have killed
any other boy. Sobered by his downfall, he declined to mount again, but
led his steed to repose in a shed, while he rejoined his friends, who
were waiting impatiently to congratulate him on his latest and best
prank.

The Committee went their rounds soon after, and, when the doors were
again opened, every one hurried to see if their articles had received a
premium. A card lay on the butter cups, and Mrs. Grant was full of pride
because _her_ butter always took a prize, and this proved that Merry was
walking in her mother's steps, in this direction at least. Another card
swung from the blue quilt, for the kindly judges knew who made it, and
were glad to please the little girl, though several others as curious
but not so pretty hung near by. The cats were admired, but, as they were
not among the animals usually exhibited, there was no prize awarded. Gus
hoped his hens would get one; but somebody else outdid him, to the great
indignation of Laura and Lotty, who had fed the white biddies faithfully
for months. Jack was sure his rabbit was the biggest there, and went
eagerly to look for his premium. But neither card nor Bun were to be
seen, for the old rascal had escaped for the last time, and was never
seen again; which was a great comfort to Jack, who was heartily tired of
him.

Ralph's bust was the best of all, for not only did it get a prize, and
was much admired, but a lady, who found Jill and Merry rejoicing over
it, was so pleased with the truth and grace of the little head, that she
asked about the artist, and whether he would do one of her own child,
who was so delicate she feared he might not live long.

Merry gladly told the story of her ambitious friend, and went to find
him, that he might secure the order. While she was gone, Jill took up
the tale, gratefully telling how kind he had been to her, how patiently
he worked and waited, and how much he longed to go abroad. Fortunately
the lady was rich and generous, as well as fond of art, and being
pleased with the bust, and interested in the young sculptor, gave him
the order when he came, and filled his soul with joy by adding, that, if
it suited her when done, it should be put into marble. She lived in the
city, and Ralph soon arranged his work so that he could give up his noon
hour, and go to model the child; for every penny he could earn or save
now was very precious, as he still hoped to go abroad.

The girls were so delighted with this good fortune, that they did not
stay for the races, but went home to tell the happy news, leaving the
boys to care for the cats, and enjoy the various matches to come off
that day.

“I'm so glad I tried to look pleasant when I was lying on the board
while Ralph did my head, for the pleasantness got into the clay face,
and that made the lady like it,” said Jill, as she lay resting on the
sofa.

“I always thought it was a dear, bright little face, but now I love and
admire it more than ever,” cried Merry, kissing it gratefully, as she
remembered the help and pleasure it had given Ralph.




Chapter XXIV. Down the River


A fortnight later, the boys were picking apples one golden October
afternoon, and the girls were hurrying to finish their work, that they
might go and help the harvesters. It was six weeks now since the new
school began, and they had learned to like it very much, though they
found that it was not all play, by any means. But lessons, exercise, and
various sorts of housework made an agreeable change, and they felt that
they were learning things which would be useful to them all their lives.
They had been making underclothes for themselves, and each had several
neatly finished garments cut, fitted, and sewed by herself, and trimmed
with the pretty tatting Jill made in such quantities while she lay on
her sofa.

Now they were completing new dressing sacks, and had enjoyed this job
very much, as each chose her own material, and suited her own taste
in the making. Jill's was white, with tiny scarlet leaves all over
it, trimmed with red braid and buttons so like checkerberries she was
tempted to eat them. Molly's was gay, with bouquets of every sort of
flower, scalloped all round, and adorned with six buttons, each of a
different color, which she thought the last touch of elegance. Merry's,
though the simplest, was the daintiest of the three, being pale blue,
trimmed with delicate edging, and beautifully made.

Mrs. Minot had been reading from Miss Strickland's “Queens of England”
 while the girls worked, and an illustrated Shakspeare lay open on the
table, as well as several fine photographs of historical places for them
to look at as they went along. The hour was over now, the teacher gone,
and the pupils setting the last stitches as they talked over the lesson,
which had interested them exceedingly.

“I really believe I have got Henry's six wives into my head right at
last. Two Annes, three Katherines, and one Jane. Now I've seen where
they lived and heard their stories, I quite feel as if I knew them,”
 said Merry, shaking the threads off her work before she folded it up to
carry home.

  “'King Henry the Eighth to six spouses was wedded,
  One died, one survived, two divorced, two beheaded,'

was all I knew about them before. Poor things, what a bad time they did
have,” added Jill, patting down the red braid, which would pucker a bit
at the corners.

“Katherine Parr had the best of it, because she outlived the old tyrant
and so kept her head on,” said Molly, winding the thread round her
last button, as if bound to fasten it on so firmly that nothing should
decapitate that.

“I used to think I'd like to be a queen or a great lady, and wear velvet
and jewels, and live in a palace, but now I don't care much for that
sort of splendor. I like to make things pretty at home, and know that
they all depend on me, and love me very much. Queens are not happy, and
I am,” said Merry, pausing to look at Anne Hathaway's cottage as she put
up the picture, and to wonder if it was very pleasant to have a famous
man for one's husband.

“I guess your missionarying has done you good; mine has, and I'm getting
to have things my own way more and more every day. Miss Bat is so
amiable, I hardly know her, and father tells her to ask Miss Molly when
she goes to him for orders. Isn't that fun?” laughed Molly, in high
glee, at the agreeable change. “I like it ever so much, but I don't want
to stay so all my days. I mean to travel, and just as soon as I can
I shall take Boo and go all round the world, and see everything,” she
added, waving her gay sack, as if it were the flag she was about to nail
to the masthead of her ship.

“Well, I should like to be famous in some way, and have people admire
me very much. I'd like to act, or dance, or sing, or be what I heard the
ladies at Pebbly Beach call a 'queen of society.' But I don't expect to
be anything, and I'm not going to worry I shall _not_ be a Lucinda, so
I ought to be contented and happy all my life,” said Jill, who was very
ambitious in spite of the newly acquired meekness, which was all the
more becoming because her natural liveliness often broke out like
sunshine through a veil of light clouds.

If the three girls could have looked forward ten years they would have
been surprised to see how different a fate was theirs from the one each
had chosen, and how happy each was in the place she was called to fill.
Merry was not making the old farmhouse pretty, but living in Italy, with
a young sculptor for her husband, and beauty such as she never dreamed
of all about her. Molly was not travelling round the world, but
contentedly keeping house for her father and still watching over Boo,
who was becoming her pride and joy as well as care. Neither was Jill
a famous woman, but a very happy and useful one, with the two mothers
leaning on her as they grew old, the young men better for her influence
over them, many friends to love and honor her, and a charming home,
where she was queen by right of her cheery spirit, grateful heart, and
unfailing devotion to those who had made her what she was.

If any curious reader, not content with this peep into futurity,
asks, “Did Molly and Jill ever marry?” we must reply, for the sake
of peace--Molly remained a merry spinster all her days, one of the
independent, brave, and busy creatures of whom there is such need in the
world to help take care of other peoples' wives and children, and do the
many useful jobs that the married folk have no time for. Jill certainly
did wear a white veil on the day she was twenty-five and called her
husband Jack. Further than that we cannot go, except to say that
this leap did not end in a catastrophe, like the first one they took
together.

That day, however, they never dreamed of what was in store for them, but
chattered away as they cleared up the room, and then ran off ready for
play, feeling that they had earned it by work well done. They found the
lads just finishing, with Boo to help by picking up the windfalls for
the cider-heap, after he had amused himself by putting about a bushel
down the various holes old Bun had left behind him. Jack was risking
his neck climbing in the most dangerous places, while Frank, with a
long-handled apple-picker, nipped off the finest fruit with care, both
enjoying the pleasant task and feeling proud of the handsome red and
yellow piles all about the little orchard. Merry and Molly caught up
baskets and fell to work with all their might, leaving Jill to sit upon
a stool and sort the early apples ready to use at once, looking up now
and then to nod and smile at her mother who watched her from the window,
rejoicing to see her lass so well and happy.

It was such a lovely day, they all felt its cheerful influence; for the
sun shone bright and warm, the air was full of an invigorating freshness
which soon made the girls' faces look like rosy apples, and their
spirits as gay as if they had been stealing sips of new cider through
a straw. Jack whistled like a blackbird as he swung and bumped about,
Frank orated and joked, Merry and Molly ran races to see who would
fill and empty fastest, and Jill sung to Boo, who reposed in a barrel,
exhausted with his labors.

“These are the last of the pleasant days, and we ought to make the most
of them. Let's have one more picnic before the frost spoils the leaves,”
 said Merry, resting a minute at the gate to look down the street, which
was a glorified sort of avenue, with brilliant maples lining the way and
carpeting the ground with crimson and gold.

“Oh, yes! Go down the river once more and have supper on the Island. I
couldn't go to some of your picnics, and I do long for a last good time
before winter shuts me up again,” cried Jill, eager to harvest all the
sunshine she could, for she was not yet quite her old self again.

“I'm your man, if the other fellows agree. We can't barrel these up for
a while, so to-morrow will be a holiday for us. Better make sure of the
day while you can, this weather can't last long;” and Frank shook his
head like one on intimate terms with Old Prob.

“Don't worry about those high ones, Jack. Give a shake and come down and
plan about the party,” called Molly, throwing up a big Baldwin with what
seemed a remarkably good aim, for a shower of apples followed, and a boy
came tumbling earthward to catch on the lowest bough and swing down like
a caterpillar, exclaiming, as he landed,--

“I'm glad that job is done! I've rasped every knuckle I've got and worn
out the knees of my pants. Nice little crop though, isn't it?”

“It will be nicer if this young man does not bite every apple he
touches. Hi there! Stop it, Boo,” commanded Frank, as he caught his
young assistant putting his small teeth into the best ones, to see if
they were sweet or sour.

Molly set the barrel up on end, and that took the boy out of the reach
of mischief, so he retired from view and peeped through a crack as he
ate his fifth pearmain, regardless of consequences.

“Gus will be at home to-morrow. He always comes up early on Saturday,
you know. We can't get on without him,” said Frank, who missed his mate
very much, for Gus had entered college, and so far did not like it as
much as he had expected.

“Or Ralph; he is very busy every spare minute on the little boy's bust,
which is getting on nicely, he says; but he will be able to come home
in time for supper, I think,” added Merry, remembering the absent, as
usual.

“I'll ask the girls on my way home, and all meet at two o'clock for a
good row while it's warm. What shall I bring?” asked Molly, wondering if
Miss Bat's amiability would extend to making goodies in the midst of her
usual Saturday's baking.

“You bring coffee and the big pot and some buttered crackers. I'll see
to the pie and cake, and the other girls can have anything else they
like,” answered Merry, glad and proud that she could provide the party
with her own inviting handiwork.

“I'll take my zither, so we can have music as we sail, and Grif will
bring his violin, and Ralph can imitate a banjo so that you'd be sure he
had one. I do hope it will be fine, it is so splendid to go round like
other folks and enjoy myself,” cried Jill, with a little bounce of
satisfaction at the prospect of a row and ramble.

“Come along, then, and make sure of the girls,” said Merry, catching up
her roll of work, for the harvesting was done.

Molly put her sack on as the easiest way of carrying it, and,
extricating Boo, they went off, accompanied by the boys, “to make sure
of the fellows” also, leaving Jill to sit among the apples, singing and
sorting like a thrifty little housewife.

Next day eleven young people met at the appointed place, basket in hand.
Ralph could not come till later, for he was working now as he never
worked before. They were a merry flock, for the mellow autumn day was
even brighter and clearer than yesterday, and the river looked its
loveliest, winding away under the sombre hemlocks, or through the
fairyland the gay woods made on either side. Two large boats and two
small ones held them all, and away they went, first up through the three
bridges and round the bend, then, turning, they floated down to the
green island, where a grove of oaks rustled their sere leaves and the
squirrels were still gathering acorns. Here they often met to keep their
summer revels, and here they now spread their feast on the flat rock
which needed no cloth beside its own gray lichens. The girls trimmed
each dish with bright leaves, and made the supper look like a banquet
for the elves, while the boys built a fire in the nook where ashes and
blackened stones told of many a rustic meal. The big tin coffee-pot
was not so romantic, but more successful than a kettle slung on three
sticks, gypsy fashion; so they did not risk a downfall, but set the
water boiling, and soon filled the air with the agreeable perfume
associated in their minds with picnics, as most of them never tasted the
fascinating stuff at any other time, being the worst children can drink.

Frank was cook, Gus helped cut bread and cake, Jack and Grif brought
wood, while Bob Walker took Joe's place and made himself generally
useful, as the other gentleman never did, and so was quite out of favor
lately.

All was ready at last, and they were just deciding to sit down without
Ralph, when a shout told them he was coming, and down the river skimmed
a wherry at such a rate the boys wondered whom he had been racing with.

“Something has happened, and he is coming to tell us,” said Jill, who
sat where she could see his eager face.

“Nothing bad, or he wouldn't smile so. He is glad of a good row and a
little fun after working so hard all the week;” and Merry shook a red
napkin as a welcoming signal.

Something certainly had happened, and a very happy something it must be,
they all thought, as Ralph came on with flashing oars, and leaping out
as the boat touched the shore, ran up the slope, waving his hat, and
calling in a glad voice, sure of sympathy in his delight,--

“Good news! good news! Hurrah for Rome, next month!”

The young folks forgot their supper for a moment, to congratulate him on
his happy prospect, and hear all about it, while the leaves rustled as
if echoing the kind words, and the squirrels sat up aloft, wondering
what all the pleasant clamor was about.

“Yes, I'm really going in November. German asked me to go with him
to-day, and if there is any little hitch in my getting off, he'll lend a
hand, and I--I'll black his boots, wet his clay, and run his errands the
rest of my life to pay for this!” cried Ralph, in a burst of gratitude;
for, independent as he was, the kindness of this successful friend to a
deserving comrade touched and won his heart.

“I call that a handsome thing to do!” said Frank, warmly, for noble
actions always pleased him. “I heard my mother say that making good or
useful men was the best sort of sculpture, so I think David German may
be proud of this piece of work, whether the big statue succeeds or not.”

“I'm very glad, old fellow. When I run over for my trip four years from
now, I'll look you up, and see how you are getting on,” said Gus, with a
hearty shake of the hand; and the younger lads grinned cheerfully,
even while they wondered where the fun was in shaping clay and chipping
marble.

“Shall you stay four years?” asked Merry's soft voice, while a wistful
look came into her happy eyes.

“Ten, if I can,” answered Ralph, decidedly, feeling as if a long
lifetime would be all too short for the immortal work he meant to do.
“I've got so much to learn, that I shall do whatever David thinks best
for me at first, and when I _can_ go alone, I shall just shut myself up
and forget that there is any world outside my den.”

“Do write and tell us how you get on now and then; I like to hear about
other people's good times while I'm waiting for my own,” said Molly, too
much interested to observe that Grif was sticking burrs up and down her
braids.

“Of course I shall write to some of you, but you mustn't expect any
great things for years yet. People don't grow famous in a hurry, and it
takes a deal of hard work even to earn your bread and butter, as you'll
find if you ever try it,” answered Ralph, sobering down a little as he
remembered the long and steady effort it had taken to get even so far.

“Speaking of bread and butter reminds me that we'd better eat ours
before the coffee gets quite cold,” said Annette, for Merry seemed to
have forgotten that she had been chosen to play matron, as she was the
oldest.

The boys seconded the motion, and for a few minutes supper was the
all-absorbing topic, as the cups went round and the goodies vanished
rapidly, accompanied by the usual mishaps which make picnic meals such
fun. Ralph's health was drunk with all sorts of good wishes; and such
splendid prophecies were made, that he would have far surpassed Michael
Angelo, if they could have come true. Grif gave him an order on the spot
for a full-length statue of himself, and stood up to show the imposing
attitude in which he wished to be taken, but unfortunately slipped
and fell forward with one hand in the custard pie, the other clutching
wildly at the coffee-pot, which inhospitably burnt his fingers.

“I think I grasp the idea, and will be sure to remember not to make
your hair blow one way and the tails of your coat another, as a certain
sculptor made those of a famous man,” laughed Ralph, as the fallen hero
scrambled up, amidst general merriment.

“Will the little bust be done before you go?” asked Jill, anxiously,
feeling a personal interest in the success of that order.

“Yes: I've been hard at it every spare minute I could get, and have a
fortnight more. It suits Mrs. Lennox, and she will pay well for it, so
I shall have something to start with, though I haven't been able to save
much. I'm to thank you for that, and I shall send you the first pretty
thing I get hold of,” answered Ralph, looking gratefully at the bright
face, which grew still brighter as Jill exclaimed,--

“I do feel _so_ proud to know a real artist, and have my bust done by
him. I only wish _I_ could pay for it as Mrs. Lennox does; but I haven't
any money, and you don't need the sort of things I can make,” she added,
shaking her head, as she thought over knit slippers, wall-pockets, and
crochet in all its forms, as offerings to her departing friend.

“You can write often, and tell me all about everybody, for I shall want
to know, and people will soon forget me when I'm gone,” said Ralph,
looking at Merry, who was making a garland of yellow leaves for Juliet's
black hair.

Jill promised, and kept her word; but the longest letters went from the
farm-house on the hill, though no one knew the fact till long afterward.
Merry said nothing now, but she smiled, with a pretty color in her
cheeks, and was very much absorbed in her work, while the talk went on.

“I wish I was twenty, and going to seek my fortune, as you are,” said
Jack; and the other boys agreed with him, for something in Ralph's new
plans and purposes roused the manly spirit in all of them, reminding
them that playtime would soon be over, and the great world before them,
where to choose.

“It is easy enough to say what you'd like; but the trouble is, you have
to take what you can get, and make the best of it,” said Gus, whose own
views were rather vague as yet.

“No you don't, always; you can _make_ things go as you want them, if you
only try hard enough, and walk right over whatever stands in the way. I
don't mean to give up my plans for any man; but, if I live, I'll carry
them out--you see if I don't;” and Frank gave the rock where he lay a
blow with his fist, that sent the acorns flying all about.

One of them hit Jack, and he said, sorrowfully, as he held it in his
hand so carefully it was evident he had some association with it,--

“Ed used to say that, and he had some splendid plans, but they didn't
come to anything.”

“Perhaps they did; who can tell? Do your best while you live, and I
don't believe anything good is lost, whether we have it a long or a
short time,” said Ralph, who knew what a help and comfort high hopes
were, and how they led to better things, if worthily cherished.

“A great many acorns are wasted, I suppose; but some of them sprout and
grow, and make splendid trees,” added Merry, feeling more than she knew
how to express, as she looked up at the oaks overhead.

Only seven of the party were sitting on the knoll now, for the rest had
gone to wash the dishes and pack the baskets down by the boats. Jack and
Jill, with the three elder boys, were in a little group, and as Merry
spoke, Gus said to Frank,--

“Did you plant yours?”

“Yes, on the lawn, and I mean it shall come up if I can make it,”
 answered Frank, gravely.

“I put mine where I can see it from the window, and not forget to water
and take care of it,” added Jack, still turning the pretty brown acorn
to and fro as if he loved it.

“What do they mean?” whispered Merry to Jill, who was leaning against
her knee to rest.

“The boys were walking in the Cemetery last Sunday, as they often do,
and when they came to Ed's grave, the place was all covered with little
acorns from the tree that grows on the bank. They each took up some as
they stood talking, and Jack said he should plant his, for he loved Ed
very much, you know. The others said they would, too; and I hope the
trees will grow, though we don't need anything to remember him by,”
 answered Jill, in a low tone, thinking of the pressed flowers the girls
kept for his sake.

The boys heard her, but no one spoke for a moment as they sat looking
across the river toward the hill where the pines whispered their
lullabies and pointed heavenward, steadfast and green, all the year
round. None of them could express the thought that was in their minds as
Jill told the little story; but the act and the feeling that prompted it
were perhaps as beautiful an assurance as could have been given that
the dear dead boy's example had not been wasted, for the planting of the
acorns was a symbol of the desire budding in those young hearts to
be what he might have been, and to make their lives nobler for the
knowledge and the love of him.

“It seems as if a great deal had happened this year,” said Merry, in a
pensive tone, for this quiet talk just suited her mood.

“So I say, for there's been a Declaration of Independence and a
Revolution in our house, and I'm commander-in-chief now; and don't I
like it!” cried Molly, complacently surveying the neat new uniform she
wore of her own choosing.

“I feel as if I never learned so much in my life as I have since last
December, and yet I never did so little,” added Jill, wondering why the
months of weariness and pain did not seem more dreadful to her.

“Well, pitching on my head seems to have given me a good shaking up,
somehow, and I mean to do great things next year in better ways than
breaking my bones coasting,” said Jack, with a manly air.

“I feel like a Siamese twin without his mate now you are gone, but I'm
under orders for a while, and mean to do my best. Guess it won't be
lost time;” and Frank nodded at Gus, who nodded back with the slightly
superior expression all Freshmen wear.

“Hope you won't find it so. My work is all cut out for me, and I intend
to go in and win, though it is more of a grind than you fellows know.”

“I'm sure I have everything to be grateful for. It won't be plain
sailing--I don't expect it; but, if I live, I'll do something to be
proud of,” said Ralph, squaring his shoulders as if to meet and conquer
all obstacles as he looked into the glowing west, which was not fairer
than his ambitious dreams.

Here we will say good-by to these girls and boys of ours as they sit
together in the sunshine talking over a year that was to be for ever
memorable to them, not because of any very remarkable events, but
because they were just beginning to look about them as they stepped out
of childhood into youth, and some of the experiences of the past months
had set them to thinking, taught them to see the use and beauty of the
small duties, joys, and sorrows which make up our lives, and inspired
them to resolve that the coming year should be braver and brighter than
the last.

There are many such boys and girls, full of high hopes, lovely
possibilities, and earnest plans, pausing a moment before they push
their little boats from the safe shore. Let those who launch them see
to it that they have good health to man the oars, good education for
ballast, and good principles as pilots to guide them as they voyage down
an ever-widening river to the sea.




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                 EDDIE

                            BY FRANK RILEY

               _It's no surprise that the top brass was
              in a complete swivet; Eddie knew answers to
               questions that weren't even asked. What's
            more_, nothing _was a secret with him around!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
             Worlds of If Science Fiction, December 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


_Philip Duncan, the St. Louis attorney and former FBI agent, who wrote
the definitive "History of Espionage", observes that in all the records
dealing with spies and counterspies there is no more significant case
than that of Dr. John O'Hara Smith, an electronics research engineer.
Duncan maintains that Dr. Smith, whose rather quixotic name is real
and not assumed, contributed more to the advancement of espionage and
counter-espionage methods than any one person in history._

_For a period of more than a year, the case of Dr. John O'Hara Smith
was known to only a few security and defense officials. The first
public reference to it came on November 22, 1956, when an assistant
to Secretary of Defense Wilson obliquely commented on it in testimony
before the House Military Affairs Committee. Subsequently, more details
were leaked to several Washington correspondents, and then vigorously
denied. A brief account of the matter appeared on an inside page of the
New York Times, but aroused no general interest._

_As a matter of fact, so little is known about the entire case that
several of the people who were in on its early phases are still not
sure whether Dr. John O'Hara Smith is alive or dead, or whether he was
a spy or counterspy._

_However, on the basis of information now declassified, plus two highly
technical papers presented to the Institute of Research Engineers,
anyone sufficiently interested can reconstruct most of the case._

       *       *       *       *       *

It began at approximately 7:15 P.M., August 11, 1955, when Dr. John
O'Hara Smith returned with a bag of groceries to his house trailer in
the Mira Mar Trailer Park, overlooking a long blue reach of the Pacific
Ocean, some twelve miles south of Los Angeles. He put the groceries on
the drainboard beside his spotless two-burner butane stove, carefully
flicked away a speck of dust and then stepped eagerly toward the rear
of his trailer, where an intricate assembly of tubes and wires occupied
what normally would have been the dining area.

Dr. Smith flipped on a switch, and then received what he later called,
in his precise, pedantic way, a split-second premonition of danger.

The Go-NoGo panel light flashed and went out; the transistor looked
grey instead of red; the wires to the binary-coded digitizer were
crossed; the extra module in the basic assembly had not been there that
morning....

Dr. Smith methodically catalogued these details, and he stepped
backward, just a breath of a moment before the low hum sharpened to a
whine. He tripped, and in falling his left shoulder knocked open the
door to the small toilet closet. Instinctively, he writhed the upper
part of his body through the narrow doorway. His thick-lensed glasses
fell underneath him, leaving him practically blind.

His elbows and knees were still making frenzied, primordial crawling
movements when the detonation brought a wave of oblivion that almost,
but not quite, preceded the pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

A squad car from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department turned in
the first report:

_John O'Hara Smith, male, white, about 45; critically injured by
explosion in house trailer; removed by ambulance to General Hospital;
explosion occurred at...._

Two days later, the Sheriffs Department apparently closed the case with
a one-line addition to its original report:

_Explosion believed to have been caused by leaking butane connection._

But, in the interval, other agencies had entered the case.

The first was the Industrial Security Office attached to the Western
Division of the Air Force's Research and Development Command in the
once suburban community of Inglewood, California.

When Chief Security Officer Amos Busch received a call at 11:32 the
morning after the explosion, he automatically noted the time on his
desk pad. The call was from Pacific Electronics, Inc., a subcontracting
firm in nearby El Segundo.

The president and owner of Pacific Electronics was on the phone. In a
tone that betrayed considerable agitation, he identified himself as
Wesley Browne.

"One of my research engineers--my best engineer, dammit--was nearly
killed last night in an explosion ... maybe he's dead now," reported
Browne, his words breathlessly treading on each other. "There's
something damn funny about this...."

Amos Busch wrote: Research engineer ... explosion ... nearly killed.
Then he asked judicially:

"What do you mean by 'damn funny', Mr. Browne?"

"This engineer was working on our vernier actuating cylinder for the
Atlas guided missile.... Just two days ago, he--he said he wanted me to
know where his files were ... in case anything happened to him...."

Amos Busch was a jowly, greying man who gave the appearance of being
slow moving. But before the president of Pacific Electronics, Inc.,
hung up, Busch had already used another phone and the intercom to put
in motion a chain reaction that would deliver to his desk the security
report on Dr. John O'Hara Smith.

There was nothing out of order in the report. There couldn't have been,
or Dr. Smith wouldn't have been cleared for the ballistic missile
program. According to the report, he had lived aloofly for all of his
adult years. Even as a boy, his sole interest had been to tinker with
mechanical projects. His grades and IQ were high above the norm, and
his attitude towards his classmates varied between impatience and
out-right sarcasm. "I always thought John was a lonely boy," a former
teacher had recalled to an FBI officer during the security check. "He
never had anything in common with other youngsters." After obtaining
his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the University of Wisconsin,
he had worked for Allis-Chalmers Research Division in Milwaukee and
lived with his mother until her death in 1951, when he bought a house
trailer and moved to the coast. He had no close friends, no record of
even a remote connection with any communist or communist-front group.

Security Officer Busch decided to visit the trailer, or what remained
of it. He was not an electronics man, or even a normally incompetent
do-it-yourself mechanic, but when he saw the shattered tangle of wires
and tubes, along with the obvious remnant of a short-wave receiver,
Amos Busch promptly called Major General David Sanders, commander of
the USAF's Western Development Division.

General Sanders scratched his tanned bald head, and said,

"We'd better get the FBI in on this, Amos."

The FBI went to work with a thoroughness that made John O'Hara Smith's
previous security investigation look like the processing of an
application to join the Kiwanis. While agents sifted every detail of
his life since the day of his birth, he was moved to a private room at
General Hospital and three nurses cleared for security were assigned to
care for him.

For eight days, Smith was in a coma. On the morning of the ninth day,
he groaned, turned to one side and rolled back again. The nurse on duty
put down her magazine and moved quickly to his bedside. She moistened a
cloth and wiped the perspiration from his high forehead, brushing back
the thinning tangle of fine, brown hair.

His eyes blinked open, stared at her. He whispered:

"Eddie ... what happened ... to Eddie?"

Remembering her instructions from the FBI, the nurse turned to make
certain the door was closed.

"Was Eddie in the trailer with you?" she asked, bending closer to catch
his reply.

He gave her a look of utter disgust, and tried to moisten his cracked
lips with the tip of his tongue. But he drifted off again without
replying.

This incident was duly recorded in the FBI's growing dossier, along
with another conversation that took place in the office of Wesley
Browne at Pacific Electronics, Inc. After carefully reviewing John
O'Hara Smith's work record, FBI agent Frank Cowles inquired:

"Is there anything--anything at all, Mr. Browne--that you would
consider out of the ordinary about Smith's recent actions?"

There was a trace of uneasiness in Browne's manner, but he tried to
cover it by looking annoyed.

"I don't know why in the devil you fellows are spending so much time on
Smith!... He sure as hell didn't blow himself up!"

"Of course not," Cowles said, placatingly. "But we never know where a
lead will come from...."

He repeated the question.

Browne hesitated.

"I suppose," he began, shifting his big bulk uncomfortably, "this will
sound kind of odd ... but you know we've got the subcontract to produce
this actuating cylinder for the Atlas...."

The agent nodded.

"Well, six months before we were asked to submit specs and bids on such
a cylinder, Smith came to me and said he had an idea for something the
Air Force might soon be needing...."

Agent Cowles maintained his air of polite attention, but his cool grey
eyes narrowed. Browne shifted again, and continued:

"I told him to go ahead--you never can tell what these research guys
will come up with...."

"And what did he come up with, Mr. Browne?"

"You won't believe this, maybe--but he came up with the design for the
complete vernier hydraulic actuating cylinder--including the drive
sector gear--at least three months before we had the faintest idea such
an item would even be needed!"

The FBI man's ball-point pen moved swiftly.

"Anything else?"

Browne instinctively lowered his voice:

"Smith even suggested that the cylinder would help to offset the roll
and yaw in an intercontinental ballistic missile!"

A brittle edge came into the agent's courteous tone:

"Did you report this to security?"

In spite of the air-conditioning unit in the window, the president and
owner of Pacific Electronics, Inc., seemed to feel that the room was
getting very warm. He ran a fat forefinger under his white collar.

"No," he admitted. "We got the contract, of course--it was a
cinch!--and I just wrote it off as a lucky break.... You can see how
I'd feel, can't you?"

"Yes," said Cowles, "I can."

Bit by bit, a new picture of the meticulous, professorial Dr. Smith
began to emerge from the FBI dossier.

During the working week, his habit had been to keep his trailer in
a small park just off Sepulveda Blvd., a half-mile from the Pacific
Electronics plant. After work on Fridays, he invariably left for the
weekend, usually for any one of a dozen scenic trailer parks along the
coast between San Diego and Santa Barbara. He always went alone. No
one had ever seen or met "Eddie". Outside of working hours, Smith's
only association with his professional colleagues was through the
Institute of Research Engineers. He attended monthly meetings, and
occasionally wrote dry, abstract articles on theoretical research for
the Institute's quarterly journal.

Under microscopic study and chemical analysis, investigators determined
that nitro-glycerine had caused the explosion. The fused mass of
electronics wreckage in Smith's trailer were identified as parts of a
computer assembly. Thousands of dollars had been spent on components
over the past three years. Purchases, usually for cash, were traced to
various electronic supply companies in the greater Los Angeles area.

Dr. Smith's bank account showed a balance of only $263.15. But the big
find came from a safety deposit box in the same branch bank. There,
along with a birth certificate, his mother's marriage license, an
insurance policy, his doctor's degree from the University of Wisconsin
and an unused passport, was a duplicate set of computer memory tapes.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took the FBI forty-eight hours to play a few selected segments from
these tapes, which obviously had been recorded over a period of several
years.

Two notations made by Agent Cowles indicate the type of material
contained on the tapes:

"If a deliberate attempt were made to run a thermonuclear test
explosion within the frontiers of Russia, in such a way as to avoid
detection, it would almost certainly be successful...."

"The Soviet Union may soon develop a new ratio of fusion to fission
energy in high yield weapons and will require additional data...."

FBI agents listening to these playbacks were convinced, almost to a
man, that they had stumbled across the hottest espionage trail since
the arrest of Klaus Fuchs and the case of the Rosenbergs.

A round-the-clock security guard was placed outside the hospital room
of John O'Hara Smith, while Federal authorities waited impatiently
to see whether he would live or die. Smith would answer, or leave
unanswered, a lot of vital questions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Security notwithstanding, it was the day after Labor Day before the
medical staff of General Hospital would permit the first direct
questioning of Dr. Smith. And then the interrogators were instructed:

"Only a few minutes."

Three men filed quietly into Smith's room as soon as the nurse removed
his luncheon tray. They stood in a semi-circle around the foot of his
bed.

Agent Frank Cowles opened a black leather folder the size of a small
billfold and presented his credentials. He introduced General Sanders
and Security Officer Busch. It was the first time any of the men had
seen John O'Hara Smith. The reports had called him pudgy, but now he
had lost twenty pounds and his cheek bones were gaunt under his pallid
skin. He wore unusually thick, dark-rimmed glasses that magnified his
eyes and gave him an owlish appearance. He returned their scrutiny with
a mixture of assurance and impatience, like a professor waiting for his
class to come to order.

"Good morning, gentlemen," he said tartly. "It's about time someone
came to see me about this...."

Cowles cleared his throat and suggested cautiously:

"Then you're willing to give us a statement, Dr. Smith?"

"Don't talk drivel, man! How are you going to know anything about it if
I don't make a statement!"

Though still weak, Dr. Smith's voice had a high, imperious quality.
Clearly, he did not wish to waste time or strength on mere
conversation.

The three men exchanged glances. Cowles and Amos Busch took out
notebooks.

"Now, Dr. Smith," Cowles began, "what is your view as to the nature of
the explosion in your trailer and the reason for it?"

"I'm an electronics research engineer, not an expert in explosives,"
Smith retorted with some asperity. "But as to the reason, I'm sure they
wanted to destroy Eddie and me!"

He glared, as if daring anybody to challenge this statement.

"Eddie?" ventured Cowles.

"I try to speak plainly, Mr. Cowles.... I said 'Eddie and me'!"

General David Sanders rested two large hands on the foot of the white
iron bedstead and squeezed until his knuckles bulged ominously. A
volatile man, he had trouble with his own temper even without being
provoked. But his voice was deceptively calm:

"Dr. Smith, do I gather that someone else was in the trailer with you
at the time of the explosion?"

Smith grimaced expressively, and answered as if speaking to an
eight-year-old:

"No, General Sanders.... I was quite alone."

After thirty years in the Air Force, Amos Busch was not used to hearing
a Major General spoken to in this way. It violated his sense of
propriety.

"Dr. Smith," he exploded, "just who or what in the hell is or was
Eddie?"

With what was remarkably close to an air of incredulity, Smith looked
slowly from one to the other.

"I gather you gentlemen haven't read my latest article."

"Not thoroughly," Cowles admitted.

"Then you don't know of my research work with an educatable computer,"
Smith said accusingly. Seeing that they didn't, he added: "I have named
it 'Eddie'!"

"What ... what is an educatable computer?" ventured Cowles.

It was clear that Dr. Smith welcomed this question. His eyes glowed
behind their thick lenses, and his high voice dropped its edge of
sharpness.

"Eddie is a computer with a capacity to learn," he replied proudly. "It
learns from assimilation of information and deductive reasoning--at a
rate at least 10,000 times that of the human mind! That's why Eddie
comes up with so many answers!... The only problem is, we seldom know
what questions the answers answer."

His three interrogators had the look of men leaning into a heavy wind.
General Sanders recovered first, and demanded:

"What the devil was it made for then?"

"Eddie was not designed for any specific task--that's why Eddie is so
valuable ... and dangerous!"

Dr. Smith rolled out this last word as if he relished it.

"Do you realize," he went on, with careful emphasis, "that Eddie has
solved problems we won't even know exist for another thousand years!"

This pronouncement was greeted by a moment of strained silence. General
Sanders finally said,

"H-m-m-m."

He looked at Busch, who looked at Cowles, who asked:

"Does Eddie solve any problems closer to our own time, Dr. Smith?"

"Of course...."

"Did Eddie come up with the idea for that Atlas stabilizing cylinder?"

"Certainly."

General Sanders moved a step closer to the bed.

"Any other ideas like that?" he inquired eagerly.

Dr. Smith's smile was neither wholly supercilious nor merely
self-assured. It was a little of both, plus a lot of pure satisfaction
at being stage center with his favorite subject. He cocked his head
back and stared down his stump of a nose.

"You're working on a missile defense system for bombers, aren't you?"
he challenged General Sanders.

"What about it?" hedged the General.

"Have you learned how to design a finned missile which can be launched
across the bomber's airstream without being thrown off course?"

General Sanders ignored a warning glance from Amos Busch.

"Do you ... does this Eddie know how to do it?"

"Eddie says it doesn't matter!"

"What?"

"Eddie says what difference does it make if the missile is thrown
off course by the airstream--as long as you can reorient it into a
compensated trajectory. We were working on a new gyroscope principle
that might do the trick...."

FBI Agent Cowles was always the personification of courtesy, but he
could assert himself when necessary. He did so now.

"Excuse me, General," he interrupted, "but first there are some other
matters we must go into with Dr. Smith."

The General nodded reluctantly. He took out an envelope and made some
notes of his own on the back of it.

"Now, Dr. Smith," said Cowles, "let's get back to the explosion.... Why
do you feel someone wanted to destroy you and Eddie?"

"I believe they had copied Eddie's circuit design and wanted to make
sure another one wasn't built--at least in the immediate future."

"Why not?"

Dr. John O'Hara Smith showed a neat flair for timing as he waited just
long enough to build suspense, before answering:

"Because Eddie knew that our security system for safeguarding the
missile program is about as up to date as the horse and buggy!"

His words couldn't have been better chosen to startle his audience.
Amos Busch took them as a personal affront.

"Horse and buggy!" he snorted. "You'd better spell that out, Dr. Smith!"

Smith's reply was prompt and precise:

"Eddie has concluded that human methods and minds alone are not enough
to cope with security issues in an area where even the simplest
technical problems must be handled by intricate computing devices...."

His owlish eyes moved from one man to another, trying to judge whether
they were following him.

"You see, Gentlemen," he went on, "the technology we are dealing with
is so unbelievably complex that the possibilities for espionage are
multiplied infinitely beyond the capacity of a human intellect to grasp
and evaluate...."

"For example," demanded General Sanders.

"For example," Smith retorted with equal sharpness, "what good does it
do to surround ballistic missile plants with security regulations if
the missile itself can be stolen right out of the air?"

"Fantastic!" said General Sanders.

"Nuts," said Amos Busch.

Agent Cowles said nothing.

John O'Hara Smith sank back against his pillow, panting a little. His
high forehead glistened with sweat. When he gathered the strength to
speak again, he directed his words to General Sanders:

"General, these ICBM missiles being fired into the Atlantic Ocean from
the coast of Florida.... Are you sure you know what's happened to all
of them?"

"I think so," the General answered calmly.

"And what about your own X-15 project, General?"

The question was almost a taunt.

General David William Sanders had jumped with his paratroopers into
France on a morning in June, 1944. He had risen in rank through the
test of battle and the more excruciating ordeal of the Pentagon. He was
a rock-jawed, six-foot, two-hundred pound man whom little could shock
and nothing could deter. But he had never faced a challenge like the
seconds of silence that followed Dr. Smith's mocking question.

There was nothing he dared say, yet in saying nothing he was saying
everything. FBI Agent Frank Cowles looked at him, then looked
quickly away. Security Officer Busch studied his own hands as though
discovering them for the first time.

The tableau remained frozen and silent until the door opened and a
doctor said,

"That's all for today, gentlemen."

The three men left without a word.

Dr. John O'Hara Smith closed his eyes. On his pale lips was the
suggestion of a smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they were alone in the General's staff car, Amos Busch exhaled and
said,

"I'll be damned."

"I gather," observed Cowles drily, "that something called an X-15 has
turned up missing."

"A week ago," sighed General Sanders. "Somewhere in the Mojave Desert
near Lancaster.... It was a very elementary prototype--the actual X-15
won't be ready for another three years...."

"Any idea what happened to it?"

"It was on a routine test flight and ran out of the tracking
screen--headed northwest.... We haven't found a splinter from it! But
there's a lot of rough country around there."

"Who knows it was lost?"

"Just the local base and our headquarters staff. The Pentagon, too, of
course."

"And Dr. Smith," added Amos Busch, incredulously.

The staff car detoured off the freeway to deliver Cowles to the Federal
Building.

"What do you make of this, Frank?" the General asked him.

"I'm just supposed to be gathering information."

"Oh, hell! We've been talking and you've been thinking--what?"

Cowles grinned.

"I've been thinking how lucky it is I don't have to make a decision
about Smith!"

"So?"

"So we'll question him again tomorrow.... As long as he's willing to
talk, the more he says, the better."

But, next morning, the medical staff again exercised its veto power.
John O'Hara Smith had developed an infection and fever during the
night. There could be no further questioning for the time being.

On the second day, when his fever ebbed, Dr. Smith irascibly ordered a
pad of paper and began an interminable series of sketches. The nurse
managed to sneak out a few of them, and FBI experts sat up all night
vainly trying to figure out what they meant.

The following evening, when the last visitor's bell had sounded and
the patients were bedded down for the night, Dr. Smith was staring
unblinkingly into the dark shadows of his room. He had been given a
sleeping pill at 9:30, but had held it under his tongue until the nurse
left, and then had put it on the night table behind his thick-rimmed
glasses. He seemed to be struggling with a problem. Once he turned on
the night light, put on his glasses and made several rapid sketches
that vaguely resembled a spider web.

A half hour later, his eyes began to droop. He picked up the sleeping
pill, rolled it between his thumb and forefinger, then put it back on
the table. His breathing became deeper.

A sound startled him awake. It was an odd sound, not a part of the
subdued hospital noises. It was a persistent, metallic, scraping sound,
and it came from outside his window.

Dr. John O'Hara Smith grabbed his glasses and rolled out of bed. He
bunched up his pillow under the covers and crawled into the deeper
darkness of the corner to the left of the window, which was open
several inches. He crouched there, knees quivering from weakness.

There followed an interval of almost inaudible prying at the screen,
broken by periods of silence as someone outside the second-story window
apparently paused to listen. Finally, the screen was released with a
faint pop. The lower half of the double-hung window eased upwards.

Again there was silence, save for the distant clatter of the
self-service elevator.

Abruptly, a pencil-thin beam of light shot through the room, toward
the bed. It focussed on the mound made by the pillow.

Short tongues of flame leaped out three times, with soft, spitting
sounds. The pillow and the tangle of blankets twitched realistically.

The beam of light winked out; the screen plopped back into place. There
were a few hasty, sliding noises of retreat, and that was all.

John O'Hara Smith's breath came in short, strained gasps, as though he
were choked up with asthma. When he got control of himself, he eased
back the edge of the drape and looked out the window. It was nearly
twenty feet to the ground. A car turned off the boulevard, and came up
the side street. The glow of its headlights briefly silhouetted the
ladder angled against the side of the hospital.

Dr. Smith sat on the edge of the bed to think things over. His left
thumb probed the holes in the blanket and pillow. This seemed to make
up his mind.

He got his clothes from the closet and dressed as quickly as he could
force his hands to move and co-ordinate. His trousers hung so loosely
that the last hole in his belt made no difference. He pulled the belt
tight and knotted it.

Next, he carefully folded his sketches and put them in the inside
pocket of his coat. As an after-thought, he also put the sleeping pill
in his pocket. Then he drank half a glass of water and painfully edged
himself out the window. His chest scraped the ledge, and it was all he
could do to strangle an out-cry of pain.

At the foot of the ladder, he staggered and nearly fell. But after a
moment's rest, he squared his shoulders and walked across a corner of
the lawn, into the shadows and the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Los Angeles Mirror-News got further than any other paper with the
story of Dr. John O'Hara Smith's mysterious disappearance from General
Hospital, leaving behind a bed riddled with three bullets. In fact, the
Mirror-News story had cleared the copy desk and was on its way down to
the composing room before it was killed by the managing editor "for
security reasons".

An all-points police bulletin was sent out, but no one was optimistic
about immediate results. When you can't admit a man is missing, when
you can't publish his photograph, you deprive yourself of the eyes and
ears of the public, which turn up seventy-five percent of the leads in
missing persons cases.

Security considerations posed three alternatives:

If Dr. Smith was telling the truth, then it was better to let whoever
had twice tried to kill him wonder whether the second attempt had been
successful.

If Smith had broken with an espionage ring, and had been marked for
death by former associates, the various agencies concerned with
security wanted a chance to find him first.

If Smith was playing some devious game of his own, let him make the
next move.

As days went by, telephone circuits from Washington to Los Angeles
carried messages that grew increasingly uncomplimentary. FBI
headquarters hinted that certain field representatives might be
transferred from Southern California to southern Kansas if results in
the Smith case were not forthcoming promptly. The Air Force suggested
that if both Dr. Smith and the X-15 prototype continued to be among
the missing, it would not be wise to present the pending promotion of
General Sanders to the White House.

The General was moodily digesting this thought, while half-listening to
a discussion at a morning staff conference, when an aide whispered:

"A call from the North American Lancaster plant, Sir. It's urgent--and
personal...."

General Sanders excused himself and hurried into his adjoining private
office.

"Sanders," he barked.

The high, imperious voice that replied was instantly recognizable:

"General Sanders, I suggest you don't try to have this call traced, or
we might not be able to finish our conversation!"

The General pressed his intercom button and held the connection open,
waiting for a chance to use it.

"Go ahead, Smith," he said.

"I'll come directly to the point," said Smith. "I want two things: A
place to work in safety and the funds to build another Eddie!"

"And what makes you think you can get them from me?"

"Because Eddie can help you find the X-15."

The General hunched closer to the intercom, raising his voice.

"Smith," he stalled, "why don't you come in and talk things over?"

"I do not intend to sit around waiting to be killed while your security
bunglers try to decide whether I'm telling the truth!"

A Staff Sergeant looked in the door.

"Is anything wrong, Sir?"

The General motioned for silence, then scrawled on a note pad:

"Trace this call!"

"Now, Dr. Smith," he said, "if you're telling us the truth, you've got
nothing to worry about...."

"General," Smith replied acidly, "do you know any better way of
convincing you than to let Eddie find the X-15?"

"Well, I--"

"Goodbye, General. You think it over--and I'll call you later. Your
word will be sufficient!"

The phone clicked, and General Sanders cursed bitterly. Later, he
talked it over with Amos Busch, who nodded agreement to the General's
proposal.

"Sure," he said. "It's worth a gamble--and we'll have Smith where we
want him!"

When John O'Hara Smith phoned that afternoon, the General said promptly:

"Come on in, Dr. Smith--you've got a deal."

The available records on this phase of the case show that a Dr. J. O.
Smith and three "assistants" were added to the payroll of a small
Pasadena electronics firm on September 17, 1955. They were installed in
one wing on the top floor of the building. The entrance to this wing
was sealed off with the familiar sign: "Restricted--Permission to enter
granted only on a need-to-know basis".

Apparently, few needed to know, for Smith and his assistants seldom had
visitors. Deliveries of electronics components were received by one of
the assistants. The four men arrived together, and left together. They
brought their lunch.

Dr. Smith, of course, had been interrogated briefly when he had turned
himself in at USAF Western Division Headquarters. But only the General
and Amos Busch had questioned him this time.

"Look, Smith," said Amos, "if we're supposed to protect you, I want to
know from what--and why it's necessary...."

John O'Hara Smith looked almost embarrassed.

"I suppose I made the same error that is so often made in declassifying
information...."

"How's that?"

"When information is declassified, it's done without mathematically
computing the infinite number of possible ways such information may be
useful to a hostile government.... Of course, you need an Eddie to make
such a computation!"

"What's this got to do with trying to knock you off?" Busch demanded.

"It's quite evident that someone read my article in the Research
Engineers' journal more carefully than you did! As a matter of fact,
Eddie actually warned me that anyone hostile to the United States could
not possibly allow my work to continue!"

Amos Busch and General Sanders exchanged wary glances.

"All right," said General Sanders, "We'll let that go for the
moment--but what made you ask about the X-15 in the first place?"

"Eddie suggested that if the ICBM missiles could theoretically be
stolen over the mid-Atlantic, it would be vastly less difficult to
steal an X-15 over the Mojave Desert!"

As the two Air Force men digested this statement, along with the
indisputable fact that an X-15 _had_ disappeared, John O'Hara Smith
blandly informed them:

"Incidentally, gentlemen, you'll have to get Eddie's duplicate tapes
for me."

Busch reddened, and could not resist asking:

"Including those short-wave broadcasts from Moscow Radio?"

"Naturally!" Dr. Smith snapped. "I'm sure Eddie extracts a great deal
of useful information from them!"

This second interrogation, like the previous one in the hospital, ended
on a triumphant note for the exasperating Dr. Smith. When they were
alone, General Sanders turned to Busch and sighed:

"We've got a double security problem, Amos! If word of this deal
with Smith gets back to Washington, I'll be laughed right out of the
service!"

But the General didn't begin to grasp the full implications of his
predicament until the afternoon of Oct. 7, when Dr. Smith phoned to say
Eddie was completed.

"Good," grunted the General. "Get going, then!"

"We'll need more information first."

"What kind of information?" General Sanders demanded suspiciously.

His suspicions were reinforced by Smith's terse dictum:

"Eddie must have all the facts on the X-15."

"Impossible!"

Dr. Smith's sniff indicated he nurtured utter disbelief in the concept
of the impossible.

"Eddie operates on facts," he reminded the General.

General Sanders didn't sleep much that night. Neither did Amos Busch.
They talked and argued until three in the morning, when the General
poured one last drink and raised his glass.

"O.K.," he said grimly. "I've gone this far and I've got to go the rest
of the way!"

They drank, and he continued:

"At least, now I won't have to worry about being laughed out of the
service--I'll get court-martialed out!"

He jabbed viciously at an ice-cube with his forefinger.

"But there's one thing I'll do first," he promised.

"What's that, Sir?"

"Strangle Smith with my bare hands!"

       *       *       *       *       *

General Sanders sat on a metal folding chair in front of Eddie, the
educatable computer, and stared belligerently at the roughly-finished
aluminum facade.

Eddie didn't look like much--certainly nothing like $13,456.12 worth of
components paid for out of the General's contingency fund. Speed had
been the primary consideration in rebuilding Eddie. The exterior case
was unpainted, and rather inexpertly held together with metal screws.
There were no knobs on the front panel controls. The vocader grill was
open; the input microphone simply rested on the workbench beside the
case. The entire assembly measured about three feet long, two feet deep
and eighteen inches high.

"O.K., what do I do now?" rasped the General.

"Just start talking--into the mike."

General Sanders took a sheaf of papers from his briefcase. He glared at
Smith:

"You get the hell out of here! This is classified information!"

Dr. Smith smiled mockingly. On his way out of the room, he paused.

"The circuits will stay open--take as long as you wish."

Feeling like a combination of fool and Benedict Arnold, General Sanders
cleared his throat and began to read:

"The North American X-15 is one of several projects now nearing the
hardware stage that will take living men as well as instruments into
the fourth environment of military activity, that of space.

"As soon as the satellite project completes preliminary exploration
of the massive high energy spectrometer, the X-15's system should be
ready to fly within two years. X-15s A, B, and C will explore 3000 mph,
50 mi. up; 4500 mph, 100 mi. up; and 6000 mph and over, 150 mi. up and
out...."

General Sanders jerked open his tie. His tanned bald head was damp with
sweat. He glanced around the empty workroom, set his jaw stubbornly and
continued:

"Meanwhile, tests are in progress with a pilot model of X-15 to work
out an entirely new vehicle system slow enough to maintain laminar flow
in the boundary layer and fast enough to maintain control effectiveness
at near sea-level environment. Unlike the ICBM which need only remain
lethal for a few seconds, both the X-15 and its personnel must return
to fly again...."

For three hours, General Sanders read steadily from his file material.
During the last half hour, his voice grew husky, his throat dry and raw.

When he finished, he went to the door and shouted:

"All right, Smith.... Come in here and put this damn thing to work!"

Smith came in and informed him imperturbably:

"Not so fast, General! Eddie will still require a great deal more
information."

"More? Dammit, I covered everything!"

"Everything you know about the X-15," Dr. Smith agreed, "but Eddie
is now venturing into a new field and must have more than technical
electronics and avionics data. He needs complete reports on the
progress of the search to date, as well as the weather, topography,
economy, history and current happenings in the entire peripheral
area. I have built a supplemental circuit to accommodate this sort of
material...."

General Sanders groaned.

"How the hell do I get into these things?"

During the next ten days, Eddie scanned microfilm on all the newspapers
published since X-15's disappearance. Also marshalled before the
scanner was every pertinent reference work available at public, private
and university libraries in California.

At length, even John O'Hara Smith seemed satisfied. He shut off the
scanner, turned on the selector mechanism and the vocader switch.

For two hours, Eddie did nothing, except hum contentedly, like a
miniature washing machine. Occasionally, a weird, flickering pattern of
multi-colored lights would trace across the scanning screen.

At 11:06 A.M., October 19, 1955, a flat, toneless voice came from the
vocader grill:

"Laminar flow equilibrium temperature at mach 8.0, altitude 150,000
ft., of a point 10 ft. back from the leading edge is 1000 degrees
Fahrenheit, assuming skin has 0.85 emissivity."

There was a small, whirring noise, and the vocader circuit clicked off.

"What the devil does that mean?" demanded the General.

"Your aerophysicists might like to know!" came back the tart reply.

At 1:34, Eddie clicked into action again:

"In flight between two planets, the theory of minimum energy orbit
should be discarded in favor of acceleration at reduced speed for
calculated periods of time."

"By the time we're flying between planets," General Sanders commented
bitterly, "the record of my court-martial will be ancient history!"

Twenty minutes later, Eddie added:

"In the operation of small exploration vehicles, the fuel cell of the
4-H Clubs in Hanford and Bitteroot Creek will compete with the chemical
energy of recombination for the prize sweet potato trophy."

Even John O'Hara Smith looked startled. But he recovered his aplomb
instantly.

"Must be a circuit crossover," he explained. "No trouble to adjust
it...."

While he probed into the interior of Eddie with a glass-handled
screwdriver, General Sanders took out a fresh cigarette and shredded it
between his fingers.

At 2:51, Eddie had this to report:

"Just as the basic physical precept of invariancy to reflection is
not necessarily true, Newton's laws of motion may not always apply
under certain circumstances. This would make it possible to penetrate
and misdirect a navigational system based on the concept of inertial
guidance."

General Sanders had been tilted back in his chair, half dozing. He
bounced forward with a jar.

"What was that?"

Dr. Smith replayed this portion of the output tape.

"We talked about that at the hospital," he sternly recalled to the
General. "And if the long-range missiles fired from Florida can be
taken over in flight, what's to prevent their being guided to a
submarine at sea?"

The General frowned in deep concentration, then relaxed and shook his
head.

"Even if something like that would be possible, we've got nothing
to worry about. Every missile carries a device which can be used to
destroy it if the missile goes off course."

John O'Hara Smith shook his head like a teacher confronted with a pupil
who was not too bright.

"Now, General, if an inertial guidance system can be penetrated, a
destructor can be blocked."

"That's a mighty big if," the General shot back.

Dr. Smith smiled sardonically.

"It may not be so big when Eddie tells us what happened to the X-15!"

"When!" the General groaned. Then he came back to the problem of
intercepted ICBM missiles. Half seriously, half sarcastically, he asked:

"What does Eddie think we should do about those missiles?"

"Undoubtedly there are other guidance systems that can't be broken so
easily ... meanwhile, Eddie suggests booby-trapping the missiles so
they'll explode when tampered with."

General Sanders closed his eyes again, and tilted back his chair. The
frown between his eyes deepened.

It was six o'clock, and the early dusk was closing in on the workroom,
before another statement came from Eddie. In its characteristic
monotone, the educatable computer said:

"The existing developmental missile program will not be affected by the
rising divorce rate in Bakersfield and Kern County."

Dr. John O'Hara Smith pursed his lips in disapproval.

"Eddie's not behaving at all well! I'm afraid that new circuit relay
will take some working over...."

General Sanders climbed slowly to his feet. He picked up his hat.

"O.K., Smith," he said, "You sold me a bill of goods, and I bought
it! Now I'm turning you and this whole damn mess back to the FBI! Let
Cowles go crazy for awhile!"

       *       *       *       *       *

As Frank Cowles sat in the General's office and heard what had been
going on, he said mildly:

"Well, I guess you had to take the gamble."

"Thanks," said General Sanders. "I hope the Pentagon will look at it
the same way--but I doubt it!"

"We've got a problem, too, General," Cowles pointed out. "When
everything's said and done, there's absolutely no charge we can file
against Smith."

"But he just can't walk away--not with all he--or that miserable
Eddie--knows about the X-15!"

Cowles smiled faintly.

"I would imagine that Eddie now belongs to the Air Force."

"We'll break the damn thing up for scrap!"

The General's intercom buzzed. An aide's voice said apologetically:

"That Dr. Smith is calling you again, Sir."

"Tell him to go to hell!"

A few seconds later, the intercom buzzed again.

"Dr. Smith on the line, Sir--He says it's something about the X-15
missile."

General Sanders looked as though he wanted to sweep the intercom off
his desk.

"Why not talk to him," Cowles suggested. "I'd like to hear this."

The General picked up his phone, and said with deceptive calm:

"All right, Smith ... make it short."

"It was the logging truck," Dr. Smith replied, in his most superior
manner.

"Huh?"

"Eddie's circuit is coordinated now. He says that the same afternoon
the X-15 disappeared, a passenger car ran into the back of a logging
truck northbound on Highway 395, about fifty miles from the Lancaster
base. Two people were killed...."

"Smith, what kind of pipedream are you peddling now?"

"General, the truck was loaded with redwood logs and heading north!"

"I don't give a damn where it was going!"

"Wait, General!" Dr. Smith's tone was almost a command. "Eddie wants to
know why a logging truck was traveling _toward_ the redwood country
with a load of logs. He also points out that the X-15 is about the size
of a redwood log, and could be concealed perfectly in the middle of a
load!"

The General seemed to be swallowing something angular and unpleasant.

"We'll check that truck," he said, at last. "But remember, Smith,
you've had it--you'll never hook me again!"

He put down the phone, and said to Cowles:

"You get on the merry-go-round this time!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The California Highway Patrol in Mojave had the report on the accident.
Clearly, it had been the fault of the passenger car. The truck
driver was identified in the report as Art Backus, an independent
hauler, working out of Eureka, located on the far northern tip of the
California coast, about eight hundred miles from the scene of the
accident.

A routine check by the FBI disclosed that Backus had done time in San
Quentin on a morals charge involving a minor girl. He had driven trucks
for a dozen lumber companies in northwest California until the past
summer, when he had bought a new truck and trailer, for cash, and gone
into business for himself.

Two FBI agents stepped up to him in a roadside cafe on Highway 1,
between Eureka and Trinidad Bay. A gaunt, stooped man, he nearly
collapsed when the agents showed him their identifications. He was
broken, and ready to talk, even before mention was made of the fact
that the penalty for peace-time espionage is death.

Backus guided the FBI to an abandoned sawmill, some two miles inland,
where the X-15 had been taken apart, minutely photographed, and then
sunk in the old log pond.

The men who had hired Backus and dismantled the X-15 had left the area
several weeks earlier. They were remembered with friendliness by the
residents of Trinidad Bay, who described them as "real nice guys and
good fishermen, too." They had told Backus they would be back in the
late autumn for the steelhead run, and perhaps would have some more
hauling business for him at that time.

The FBI offered Backus one chance for life. He accepted it, with abject
eagerness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beyond this point, there are no more available records on the case of
Dr. John O'Hara Smith, and Eddie, the educatable computer. But several
items, not apparently related in any way, make interesting speculation.

On January 3, 1956, the Air Force reported that a Thor
intermediate-range ballistic missile, launched from Patrick Air Force
Base, Florida, had been destroyed when it appeared to be wandering off
course.

About the same date, a Panamanian freighter, riding the gulf-stream
toward the West Indies, radioed a report of sighting a massive oil
slick and a scattering of debris, some of it bearing Russian insignia.
No survivors were found.

The U.S. State Department solicitously inquired of the Soviet Union if
any of its vessels had been lost in the winter storms of the Caribbean.
The Soviet Union testily replied that no Soviet vessels could have
been lost, since Soviet vessels, as a matter of sound international
principle, confined their operations to their own territorial waters.

During Easter Week of 1956, the FBI announced the arrests of four men
on charges of espionage: A druggist in Tucson, Arizona; an importer
in San Francisco; a retired real-estate operator in Los Angeles; an
obscure trucker in northern California. All pleaded guilty in order to
escape the gas chamber. The details of the charges against them were
not disclosed, except to members of a Federal Grand Jury.

Two other published items are worth noting:

The May, 1956, issue of the journal published by the Institute of
Research Engineers reported that one of its members, Dr. J. O. Smith,
had recovered from injuries suffered in the explosion of a butane stove
and had accepted a government research position in Washington, D.C.

The other item was a paragraph in Aviation Weekly, congratulating Major
General David William Sanders on his promotion to Brigadier General.
